REITH LECTURES 1976: Mechanics of the Mind
Colin Blakemore
Lecture 4: A Child of the Moment
TRANSMISSION: 1 December 1976 – Radio 4

Imagine that you are asked to remember the number 584. What could be easier?
Whether you wanted to or not, the number would be yours to recall for the next few
minutes. With the slightest effort of will, you could remember it at the end of this
lecture; and, if it were important enough, you would recollect it next month, next year
or next century.
There is an American—I’ll call him Henry M.—who has been robbed of this precious
power to remember; not partially and gradually, just by growing old, as most of us
will be, but suddenly and almost totally, by the knife of a well-intentioned surgeon.
From Henry we can learn about the nightmare of eternal forgetfulness—a condition
that Franz Kafka would have been delighted to describe. Brenda Milner, at the
Montreal Neurological Institute, has followed the case of Henry for more than 20
years. She once asked him to try to remember that very number, 584. He sat quietly,
entirely undistracted, for 15 minutes, and, to her surprise, he could recall the number.
But when asked how he did it, this is what he said:
It’s easy. You just remember eight. You see, five, eight and four add up
to 17. You remember eight, subtract it from 17 and it leaves nine. Divide
nine in half and you get five and four, and there you are: 584. Easy!
Henry lives in a world of his own, restricted, not just in space, but in time. Ever since
an operation on his brain in 1953, his world has been just a few minutes long. Without
such elaborate and fantastic tricks of rehearsal, almost everything slips from his mind,
like water through a sieve. Every moment has a terrible freshness. He never knows the
day of the week, what year it is or even his own age. Even though Brenda Milner has
spent countless hours with Henry, she is an utter stranger to him, and on each
occasion that they meet it is as if she were entering his transient world for the first
time. He is, quite simply, unable to remember the new contents of his conscious
experience. His general intelligence is not at all reduced and he is painfully aware of
his own shortcomings. He apologises constantly for the absence of his mind,
Right now, I’m wondering, have I done or said anything amiss? You
see, at this moment, everything looks clear to me, but what happened
just before? That’s what worries me. It’s like waking from a dream; I
just don’t remember . . . Every day is alone in itself, whatever
enjoyment I’ve had, and whatever sorrow I’ve had.
Henry still remembers his very old memories and habits, but cannot form new ones
and even has amnesia for things that happened in the years immediately before the
operation. Three years before, his favourite uncle died, but Henry suffers the same
grief anew each time that he is told of his uncle’s death.

1

In 1892, the German physiologist, Friedrich Goltz, described a similar loss of memory
in dogs after the cerebral cortex had been damaged. ‘They do not learn from past
experience,’ Goltz wrote. ‘They do not have experiences, for only he who has
memories can have experiences. The do- cerebrated dog is essentially nothing but a
child of the moment.’ Henry is a ‘child of the moment’, too; he is trapped,
interminably, in the naïveté of infancy.
We discover from this special case that our memories have two forms: one of them is
quickly created, but fades within a few minutes, to be followed by a more persistent
store, which can last for a lifetime. The most popular view is that short-term
memories are converted or consolidated into the long-term ones, but the embodiments
of the two sorts of memory must be quite different. Henry has lost the power to form
new long-term memories; or perhaps he can make them, but has no way to retrieve
them again.
The injury to the brain of Henry was deliberate. When he was young, he gradually
developed epilepsy so severe that he was unable to work. The surgeon treating him
decided to remove the part of the brain that he thought was causing the epileptic
seizures—an evolutionarily ancient part of the cerebral cortex, called the
hippocampus (meaning a sea-horse) because of its twisted shape, which lies tucked
inside the temporal lobes of the cerebral hemispheres. The hippocampus had been
removed on one side in many previous patients, but because Henry’s epileptic attacks
seemed to involve the whole of his brain, the surgeon destroyed the hippo- campus on
both sides. And that was the cause of his present terrible state, for the hippocampus of
man is crucially important in laying down or retrieving long4erm memories.
Presumably, this surgical procedure will never be used again. Experimental brain
surgery, which I shall discuss in a future lecture, is perhaps the riskiest form of
experimental medicine, because it is irreversible and its effects are expressed as
changes in the personal experience and the behaviour of the patients involved.
In the 1940s, as the epilepsy of Henry was becoming progressively worse, a Canadian
neurosurgeon, Wilder Penfield was gathering other evidence that the temporal lobes
of man conceal the key to his memory. Penfield was also operating on epileptic
patients, removing the areas of irritative damage in their brains. To guide him in
pinpointing the epileptic focus, he used a method of exploring the human brain that
has provided perhaps more evidence about its organisation than any other technique.
He stimulated the surface of the brain with a weak electric current, not to damage it,
but to excite impulses in the cells and fibres under the stimulating electrode. His
patients were completely conscious during this electrical invasion of their minds.
Only the scalp was locally anaesthetised; the tissue of the brain itself its insensible to
touch, heat or pain.
Penfield hoped to discover in each patient an area in the brain which, upon
stimulation, would arouse the same curious mental aura that ushered in the epileptic
attacks. That would be the spot to destroy, Penfield argued; and this approach was
remarkably successful. But it also gave him the chance to discover the functions of
other parts of the cerebral cortex. Stimulation of the touch area produced strange
sensations felt by the patient in his skin; excitation of the visual cortex made the
patient see flashes of light or swirling coloured forms in his visual field. But when

2

Penfield moved hits stimulating electrode to the temporal lobe and the hippocampus
itself, the experiences of the patient were not mere fragments of sensation. They were
whole episodes of existence, plucked from the patient’s previous life. The person
would suddenly be transported into the past and would feel himself eavesdropping on
a familiar scene.
One of Penfield’s patients was a young woman. As the stimulating electrode touched
a spot on her temporal lobe, she cried out: ‘I think I heard a mother calling her little
boy somewhere. It seemed to be something that happened years ago…in the
neighbourhood where I live’. Then the electrode was moved a little and she said:
‘I hear voices. It is late at night, around the carnival somewhere—some sort of
travelling circus. I just saw lots of big wagons that they use to haul animals in.
There can be little doubt that Wilder Penfield’s electrodes were arousing activity m
the hippocampus, within the temporal lobe, jerking out distant and intimate memories
from the patient’s stream of consciousness.
Memory, its physical structure, is an unsolved challenge for brain research. In fact, it
is, perhaps, the central question, rather like the problem of the structure of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) for molecular biology and genetics. But theories about the
nature of memory have still not really progressed beyond the stage of description
through analogy. Analogy has often been a valuable stage in the discussion of
biological problems, but it is, of its nature, constrained by the technological
development of the time or the level of scientific knowledge in other fields. The
restrictive nature of argument by analogy is aptly illustrated by historical models of
memory. They are almost all based on the devices used by man himself to store
information.
According to Aristotle, sensory impressions entered the head with such force that they
left physical inscriptions in the brain, like a scribe engraving on a wax tablet. This
idea, that the mind is a tabularasa on which experiences are literally written, was
espoused by the empiricist school of philosophy. ‘Let us then suppose the mind to be,
as we say, white paper, void - of all characters, without any ideas;’ wrote John Locke
in 1690, ‘how comes it to be furnished? Whence comes it by that vast store, which the
busy and boundless fancy of man has painted on it with an almost endless variety? To
this I answer in one word, from experience.’
Even current models of memory dwell on analogies with existing, artificial methods
of storing information. Mental memory has been compared with the magnetising of
ferrite rings in the core memory of a computer, and with the ‘distributed’ image of a
hologram—a device that stores a record of a three-dimensional scene through a
process involving photography with laser light. Each analogy has a certain attraction
because it mirrors some particular special feature of memory. The permanence of
lines scratched in a wax tablet or written on paper mimics the durability of real
memory. The speed of access to the memory of a computer core is reminiscent of the
remarkably rapid way in which neuronal memory can be consulted.
Because the information in a holographic plate is’ distributed ‘when part of the plate
is destroyed, a somewhat degraded reconstruction of the entire stored image can still
be retrieved from it; and there is a similar phenomenon in the brain. The eminent

3

psychologist, Karl Lashley, working in the first half of this century, described a kind
of resistance to local injury in the store of information in a rat.
The actual representation of remembered events is almost certainly in the cerebral
cortex, but Lashley found that small areas of damage in the rat’s cortex simply blurred
the animal’s ability to perform tasks that it had previously learned. The degree of
degradation of memory was roughly proportional to the area of damaged cortex.
Lashley expressed his frustration in failing to track down the physical substance of
individual stored remembrances in a famous scientific paper in 1950. ‘I sometimes
feel,’ he wrote, ‘in reviewing the evidence on the localisation of the memory trace,
that the necessary conclusion is that learning just is not possible.’
Description by analogy seems less successful for the nervous system than for other
organs in the body. The heart is like a pump in its action and the kidney is like a filter
because they are a pump and a filter. The analogies are both comparisons with other
pieces of machinery and actual explicit descriptions of the mechanism of heart and
kidney. But however similar in its properties mental memory is to a computer core or
a hologram, the brain is not a set of magnetised rings or a laser illuminated
photographic plate. The value of analogy is that it provides rules, best expressed in
mathematical terms, for accomplishing certain logical processes. The rules will
restrict the set of possible devices that can accomplish the task. Unfortunately, the
physical structure and mechanisms of operation in the brain are so unlike those of any
piece of machinery made by man that analogies are usually weak.
In any case, most theories of memory concentrate on the manner in which events can
cause changes in physical structures. In other words, they are concerned with the
machinery of memory, not the code— the symbolic form in which the events are
registered. The printing of words on a page is a simple and efficient method of storing
information, but it means nothing without knowledge of the language in which the
message is written. Most theories of memory are, as it were, concerned with the
question of ink and paper and not with the much more fundamental issue of the
grammar of remembrance.
From this point of view, the most compelling theory of memory is the claim that
remembering might consist of the synthesis of specific chemical molecules in the
brain, the structure of each molecule representing a remembered event. This
hypothesis is so powerful because it not only describes a possible physical substrate
for memory (the synthesised molecule), but also embodies the nature of the code by
which the information might be stored (the sequence of compounds in the molecule or
its specific shape).
Certainly, long-term memory must involve some physical change in the structure of
the brain. Consider the following classical experiment; a rat is quickly taught to run
through a maze or perform some other task. It is then cooled down to about five
degrees centigrade for some time, stopping all electrical activity in its brain. When it
thaws out, the rat, nose the worse for wear, tries the maze again. With a fairly long
interval between learning and cooling, the rat still remembers the maze. But if cooled
within minutes or perhaps seconds of learning, it reacts as if the task were completely
new. The necessary conclusion is that the initial storage of information, short-term
memory, involves ongoing patterns of nerve impulses in circuits of nerve cells

4

connected together by their fibres, while long-term memory is a lasting structural
change in the pathway of cells. Some would say that this structural change is the
synthesis of a substance that actually describes the remembered event. The theory of
chemical memory even contains a strong analogy, for it draws a comparison between
mental memory and that other monolithic biological mechanism of remembering—the
genetic code.
The double helix of DNA is, indeed, a store of information. What it remembers is the
exact chemical composition of the organic species it belongs to: it is, quite simply, a
recipe for replicating the structure of that organism. And the sequence of nucleotide
bases within the double helix is not just the structure of genetic memory, but is the
code as well. The four different bases that constitute the nucleotide chain are letters in
an alphabet. Each triplet of three successive bases forms a word that specifies a
particular amino-acid. The amino-acids, of which there are 20 kinds, are assembled
within the cell, according to the instructions written in each gene, to make a
polypeptide chain, which folds into a protein molecule. It is these proteins that define
the nature and form of each organism: in particular, the enzyme proteins determine
the metabolic processes that the cell can perform.
The structure of DNA proposed by Francis Crick and James Watson put flesh on the
skeleton that Charles Darwin left in the Victorians’ cupboard. It explains, with such
staggering simplicity, the physical nature of genetic memory, and the code by which it
stores information. What Darwin had supplied, 100 years before, was the other
essential component—a way in which genetic memories could be forgotten. Natural
selection is the mechanism by which only useful genetic memories are retained.
It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of forgetting in mental memory, too. The
selection process that lets us store in long-term memory only a tiny fraction of the
running contents of short-term memory is essential if the brain is to use particular
instances to derive general principles by a process of inference. The Russian
psychologist, Alexander Luria, has described a man whose memory seemed to have
no limit—a mnemonist whose mind was so extraordinary that Luria wrote of him in
terms usually reserved for the mentally ill. He could commit to memory in a couple of
minutes a table of 50 numbers, which he could recall in every minute detail many
years later. His greatest difficulty was in learning how to forget the endless trivia that
cluttered his mind.
In a remarkable short story, Funes the Memorious, the Argentinean writer Jorge Luis
Borges describes, in fiction, the alien totality of forgetlessness. A young boy, Ireneo
Funes, had a fall from a horse and forgot how to forget. Borges writes:
We, in a glance, perceive three wine glasses on the tables; Funes saw all
the shoots, clusters, and grapes of the vine. He remembered the shapes
of the clouds in the south at dawn on the 30th April of 1882, and he
could compare them in his recollection with the marbled grain in the
design of a leather- bound book which he had seen only once, and with
the lines in the spray which an oar raised in the Rio Negro on the eve of
the battle of Quebracho…He told me: I have more memories in myself
alone than all men have had since the world was a world.

5

But what kind of molecules in the brain could possibly qualify as the repository of
mental memory? They would need to be complex and therefore large in order to have
sufficient variability in form to repre.’ sent the high informational content of each
remembrance. In that case, the choice of appropriate macromolecules within the nerve
cell is rather limited. They would have to be either proteins or the nucleic acids
themselves—that is DNA, or RNA, the ribonucleic acid that transcribes the message
from the DNA of the gene and which actually assembles the protein molecules. But
all of these substances, DNA, RNA and protein, employ logically equivalent coded
messages. The series o amino-acids in a protein contains identical information to the
sequence of bases in the RNA on which it grew, and this, in turn, is simply a recoded
version of the base sequence in the DNA of the gene. It is rather like the same
sentence being expressed first in written words, then in Braille translation, and finally
in Morse code; the information is identical. And so it is in protein, RNA and DNA.
So, in order for a wholly novel and unique protein or RNA molecule to be made for
each memory, a new DNA sequence would have to be synthesised first, within the
actual gene. But there is no evidence that the DNA of nerve cells is continuously
changing. In fact, DNA is virtually the only material that is not constantly being
replaced in the living cell. The very permanence of genetic memory relies on the
extraordinary stability of the DNA molecule: how can mental memory work by
changing it?
There seem to be only two possible solutions to this dilemma. Either the whole theory
of chemical memory is wrong, or the existing, inherited DNA of the genes already
contains the capacity to synthesise the RNA or protein that is used to represent any
conceivable new remembrance. Each brain might contain within itself all the potential
memories that it could ever form: every event would merely trigger production of the
appropriate molecule, which was already described, in latent form, in the animal’s
inherited DNA.
This fantastic notion that every memory is innately within us, in our genetic makeup,
is curiously reminiscent of Plato’s nativist theory that all human knowledge is derived
by the soul from a previous existence. In his dialogue, Meno, Plato pictures a simple,
uneducated slave-boy, Meno, being interrogated by Socrates. By judicious choice of
questions, Socrates drags out of Meno an account of the fundamental theorems of
geometry. True knowledge, Plato argues, must be within us all, and learning consists
solely of discovering what we already know.
It is true that the genetically-programmed wiring of the brain restricts the way in
which each animal can act, and even provides, a vast repertoire of inherited automatic
reflexes that allow it, without previous personal experience, to react appropriately to
certain stereotyped situations that it might encounter. Built-in reflexes are the inherent
knowledge of Plato: they are the behavioural reflections of genetic memories about
the experience of earlier brains.
But it is inconceivable that the empirical experience of each individual animal is
actually represented by the synthesis of molecules. The expression of even innate
reflexes requires the construction of nerve pathways that guarantee the appropriate’
response to the particular stimulus. The formation of personal memories must surely
involve a similar transformation in the connectivity of the brain.

6

What the chromosomes must store is the instructions needed to allow any circuit of
nerve cells to change, depending on its own activity, without specifying in advance
which circuit will be involved. The ultimate chemical contribution to mental memory
is, then, the genetically-programmed ability to learn.
The emergence of the capacity to learn is the triumph of evolution. Its first appearance
must have been, quite simply, a transcendent step in the development of animal life,
for learning frees the individual from the chains of his own double helix. It is the
predictive power of learning and memory that give them such immense survival
value. A primary requirement of any animal is that it should be able to anticipate
changes in its environment. Inherited reflexes contain a static description of the events
of high probability in the past experience of the species, but learning allows each
animal to add a stock of personal secrets to ‘its description of the probabilities of the
world.
To anticipate the future is the ultimate goal of the evolution of the nervous system.
But since it works inductively, the brain can only base its predictions on probabilities
drawn from the past. True clairvoyance —the mythical power of the soothsayer and
teller of fortunes to predict future events without statistical qualification— would be
so immensely valuable to an animal that its natural selection by evolutionary pressure
would have been explosive. If any species had had genuine second sight, not only
would it necessarily have spread like a flood through the gene pool, but also that
species would rule the world., For this reason alone the biologist must regard with
extreme suspicion the claim that some individuals have extra-sensory perception, or
true clairvoyance. And yet we do owe a good deal of our own biological superiority to
our ability to plan for the future. There is no doubt that the evolution of intelligence
has involved a gradually increasing power of prediction.
In the back-to-front world that Alice found behind the looking-glass, the White Queen
actually lived in reverse. ‘There’s one great advantage in it,’ she said, ‘that one’s
memory works both ways.’ ‘It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards.’
So it is. Our memory is not quite the kind of bizarre predictor of the future that made
the White Queen scream before her finger was pricked, but the biological (if not the
aesthetic) value of remembering is not that it allows one to reminisce about the past,
but that it permits one to calculate coldly about the unknown future.
Just as individual memory has partly released each animal from the immediate
restrictions of the genetic code, so the sharing of learned ideas by social animals has
added an entirely new dimension to the progress of evolution. The spread of ideas
through social groups of animals, which is so well developed in the, primates, and
especially in man, allows the experience of the individual to become reflected in the
behaviour of other members of the same social group, even those in later generations.
This is truly the social inheritance of culturally acquired characteristics.
In 1953, on the Japanese island of Koshima, a female macaque monkey called Imo, a
genius amongst monkeys, Invented a method for cleaning unpalatable sand from the
sweet potatoes that the group of scientists observing the monkeys had been scattering
on the beach since the previous year. She dipped each potato into the water of a brook
with one hand and brushed away the sand with the other. During the following two
years this habit of washing potatoes spread to 90 per cent of the members of Imo’s

7

troop: only the youngest infants didn’t know it, and the oldest males steadfastly
refused to adopt it.
By the sharing of ideas, animals, and most especially humans, pool the ability of their
group. The pinnacles of intelligence are exploited by the entire society. In human
culture, this has led to the emergence of a kind of communal intellect—the collective
mind of man—that has pushed forward his biological progress at a prodigious rate. At
first, the cultural transmission of human ideas must have been by imitation or
demonstration, as it is among monkeys, and later by word of mouth. Such methods of
transfer are subject to the opportunity for progressive distortion like that which
characterises the spread of a rumour. And hence all the conditions would exist for a
kind of evolution of ideas. The variability, which genetic mutation gives in Darwinian
evolution, would be provided by the regular contribution of individual new ideas and
their distortion in cultural transfer. The natural selection of these ideas would be made
on the basis of their utility; in general, useful ideas would survive because they would
propagate themselves, just as an adaptive genetic mutation flourishes.
In effect, the evolution of ideas in the co1lective mind of man has virtually brought
true natural selection to a halt. The ability of man to manipulate and plunder his
environment has steadily grown, at the same time that medical skill has almost
vanquished the forces that put pressure on the biologically undesirable elements of his
genetic stock. Many biologists, including Jacques Monod, have ex’ pressed their fears
at the dilution in quality of the human gene pool. But that is not all we have to fear.
The present status of humanity is, in fact, a stalemate between the forces of
conventional evolution, which threaten to punish us for breaking beyond the bounds
of our biological rights, and our collective mind, which battles to pre serve our present
status. What we should be most afraid of, perhaps, is the fact that, since the invention
of printing, magnetic tape and computer cards, the collective mind has lost the vital
ability to forget A principal task for us lies in the organisation of knowledge for ready
access. This problem is nowhere more acute than in science itself, where the sheer
accumulation of facts threatens to impede rather than to assist the progress of new
ideas.
Already, the technology that supports everyday life in the developed world has
become so complex that no single mind can understand it. Man might not go out with
a bang of his own creation, nor freeze his race to death by stealing the energy
resources oil the earth. He might simply drown himself in a flood of information;
society could collapse because it no longer comprehends its own cultural inheritance
The code of the collective mind—the medium by which ideas are transmitted by
man—is human language That Is the subject of my next lecture.

8

