REITH LECTURES 1976: Mechanics of the Mind
Colin Blakemore
Lecture 3: An Image of Truth
TRANSMISSION: 24 November 1976 – Radio 4

In Cambridge, Massachusetts, in London, England, and in Lyons, France, there are
men who can see, but do not perceive. They have eyes that function, but they
themselves are unaware of the things that their eyes can see and on which they are
able to act. These men all have brain injuries at the back of the cerebral hemispheres,
in the part called the visual cortex, which receives messages from the eyes.
In the middle of the last century, a Frenchman, Marie-Jean-Pierre Flourens, provided
the first real experimental evidence that the cerebral cortex is responsible for so-called
‘higher functions’ of the mind. Although he spoke of faculties like will and intellect,
his experimental subjects were animals, not people.
Like Aristotle, Galen and Leonardo before him, Flourens had intuitive trust in the
continuity of biological mechanisms, which led him to extrapolate from animals to
man. Shortly before his death in 1867, Flourens wrote in opposition to Darwin’s new
theory of natural selection, but it was that very theory that made legitimate his own
experimental paradigm. Flourens worked by studying the consequences on an
animal’s behaviour of damage to its brain.
‘Animals deprived of their cerebral lobes,’ he concluded, ‘have…neither perception,
nor judgment, nor memory, nor will The cerebral lobes are therefore the exclusive
seat of all the perceptions and all the intellectual faculties.’
Hermann Munk, in Berlin, first realised that small injuries to the surface of the cortex
could render an animal apparently blind or seemingly deaf. But Munk also made the
remarkable discovery that these ‘mind-blind’ and ‘mind-deaf’ animals quite rapidly
recovered their senses; he likened their progress to young animals learning to
appreciate their sensations for the first time.
How different the situation seemed to be when neurologists first turned their attention
to the human cortex. It is a sad fact that brain science, no less than engineering and
technology, has reaped a rich harvest of knowledge from the tragedy of war.
The First World War was a vast, unwanted experiment in neurology. The Irish
neurologist, Gordon Holmes, studied men whose injuries affected the back part of the
hemispheres, which Munk had implicated in the functions of seeing in animals.
Holmes confirmed that a tiny area of damage here produced a corresponding patch of
blindness, or scotoma, in the visual field. The patient stared fixedly at a point, as
Holmes mapped out the scotoma by waving a fine wand with a light on the end of it.
Whenever the light fell into the affected part of the visual field, it disappeared from
the patient’s view.

1

On the question of recovery of vision, however, Holmes’s results were totally
different from Munk’s. The representation of the eyes in the visual cortex, he wrote,
‘is fixed and immutable, so that if a part of the visual cortex be totally destroyed, there
will be permanent blindness of the corresponding segment of the visual fields.’
Holmes re-measured the blind areas years after the injury in some of his patients and
found them quite unchanged.
But new experiments, in the United States, England and France, show that such
people can actually see without knowing it. The patients in question have indubitable
injuries of the visual cortex; they never see a flashing light inside the resulting
scotoma; in fact, they deny seeing anything there at all. Yet, if such a light is briefly
flashed and they are asked to guess where it is by pointing to it, they do so with
remarkable skill. They can even guess reliably whether a line flashed within the
scotoma is horizontal or vertical, even though they claim that they see no line at all,
and find the whole exercise rather foolish.
It is well known that some nerve fibres from the eyes send their signals to regions
below the cerebral hemispheres, more primitive parts of the brain that are rather
important in a frog, but were thought only to control movements of the eyes in man.
Now we must accept that these sub-cortical visual areas are capable cr1 providing
information for the movements of the hands and even for the guesses of an unaware
mind. The phenomenon of ‘blindsight’, as it has been called, establishes that the
cortex is the home of conscious perception, but some kind of sensory function can
continue without it.
Then why, one might ask, have the cerebral cortex at all? What is it that the intact
brain does that the man with ‘blindsight’ cannot do? It constructs a description of
outside reality, a model in which it has confidence and sufficient faith to speak.
According to the adage of William Blake: ‘Everything possible to be believed is an
image of truth’ and what our perception provides us with is this ‘image of truth’,
which we trust as a measure of reality. Between the turmoil of moving lights that fills
the tiny image within our eye and the credible world of external objects that we build
from that image is a miraculous transformation.
How easy it all was for some of the Greeks, most notably Euclid: light, he thought,
streamed out from the eyes to touch the world, like a million invisible fingers. Objects
were seen as objects because they were felt as solid and real by these seeing hands.
The long fingers of vision certainly do free us from the tiny world within the reach of
our arms.
When Galileo became blind in 1638, he wrote: ‘This heaven, this earth, this universe,
which. . . I have enlarged a hundred, nay a thousand fold beyond the limits universally
accepted by the learned men of all previous ages, are now shrivelled up for me into
such a narrow compass as is filled by my own bodily sensations.’
But seeing is not like touching. An object held in the hand is permanent, solid,
immutable in size and shape: the patterns seen by the eyes change their size with their
distance, and change their shape with their movement, as every artist knows. The fact
is, of course, that the subjects of seeing are not objects themselves, but the flat,
intangible images of them, which hide within the pupil of the eye.

2

Light comes into the eye in a cone of straight rays, not out of it, as Euclid had said.
The realization of this produced a revolution in Renaissance art, not just through the
discovery of perspective, but because artists must have learned that their task was to
challenge the viewer just as he is tested by the image in his own eye. The retina of the
eye is the canvas of the brain. If we can conjure up everything that we know of reality
from the poverty of its two-dimensional image, why should the artist not use his
painting to provoke perceptions just as real?—But to do so, the painter who strives to
represent reality must transcend his own perception. He must, ignore or override the
very mechanisms in his mind that create objects out of images: for we do not perceive
our retinal image; we experience an external world of solid things.
In a way, the Greeks were right. As you watch a man walk away, you see that he
remains the same size (although the image of him on your retina certainly shrinks).
Look at a coin when you turn it in your hand and you perceive it always as a round
disc of metal (although its image is an infinite series of ellipses). What we reconstruct
within our mind’s eye are the constant physical properties of objects; and so we
should, because those are the things that we need to know. To do this, we must not
only recognise the outlines of individual objects from the confusion within the eye,
but must also discover from the image subtle clues about their distances. Only when
we know both the true geometrical shapes in the image and the distances of the
objects portrayed there can we derive the constancy of our perceptions. The artist, like
the eye, must provide true images and the clues of distance to tell his, magic lies.
The mechanisms of constant perception are built into our brains. They are either
rapidly learned or they may even be inherited: a baby a few weeks old reacts as if his
perceptions already have constancy of shape and size.
It took great minds like those of Isaac Newton and John Dalton to formulate the laws
of motion and the conservation of matter in words and mathematics. But every child
discovers a pictorial version of the physical laws of the universe in his own
perceptions.
The representational artist, then, must be as perceptually naive as an embryo; he must
not illustrate his own model of the world, but must search behind it for the image in
his eye. As Paul Klee wrote in 1902: ‘I must begin, not with hypothesis, but with
specific instances, no matter how minute.’
Renaissance painters, starting in the middle of the 15th century, with the pioneer of
perspective, Filippo Brunellesehi, tried to create the trompe I’oeil, the deceit of the
eye.
Their greatest achievements are the extraordinary ceiling paintings, like those of
Andrea Pozzo in the Church of Sant’ Ignazio in Rome, where the artist has painted a
continuation of the architecture of the building, soaring upwards and occupied by an
unruly host of angels and cherubs with good heads for heights. These ceiling paintings
gain their magical transparency because they have no distinctive edge. There is
nothing to identify them as paintings. But because a painting is nothing but a flat,
geometrical projection, its perspective can only be perfect from one viewing-point.
Only one observer in the church can see the painting as it should be seen. From any

3

other position, its geometry is wrong and its painted pillars and arches seem to twist
and sag. Just when the artist succeeds in synthesising exactly the retinal projection of
an actual scene, then surely he fails, for he gives the privilege of perfection to one
viewer alone.
Conventional paintings and drawings have a different and special quality. As the
psychologist, Richard Gregory, has said: ‘Pictures are paradoxes.’ They are part of
our actual world of objects and, at the same time, are messengers from a different
world. We see them simultaneously as lines and colours on a flat surface and as the
solid objects that they portray. The quest for perfection in the trompe l’oeil was one
attempt to destroy the paradox of paintings.
It was the Romantic movement that suddenly rediscovered what pre-Renaissance
iconographers must surely have known— that the picture itself is part of the
perception it creates. Was abstraction in art an inevitable response to the discovery of
paradox? Certainly it attempts to resolve the conflict by exploiting the painting as an
object itself—almost the antithesis of the transparent reality of the trompe l’oeil. But
to defy the model-builder in the mind, to try to express an idea independent of a
subject, is even more difficult than mimicking reality. ‘A good painter has two chief
objects to paint,’ wrote Leonardo da Vinci, ‘man and the intention of his soul; the
former is easy, the latter hard.’
The fact that light forms an image on the retina posed serious problems for art: but the
discovery of the retinal image presented difficulties no less profound for philosophy
and science. The Arab, Ibn Al Haitham, or Aihazen, described the convergence of
rays of light on to the eye in about AD 1000, and Christoph Schemer carried out crude
experiments on the optical properties of the eye early in the seventeenth century.
However, René Descartes is usually given the credit for the first accurate description
of the retinal image. He took the eye of an ox, cut a window in the back of it and
covered it with paper. Holding the eye up to the light, he saw on the paper a tiny
inverted image of his room. I think it is no coincidence that he published this
discovery in 1637, side by side with the first statement of his philosophical principle
of believing nothing that be felt he might doubt. If the apparent richness of our visual
world comes into us in such a comical form—a tiny picture, upside-down—how can
we possibly trust it? The internalisation of knowledge is a problem that has dogged
philosophy, and physiology, ever since.
However, the British school of empiricist philosophy, from Francis Bacon and John
Locke in the 17th century, to Bishop George Berkeley and David Hume in the 18th,
did put their trust in sensory experience as a reliable source of knowledge. They saw
around them the growing material success of England in trade and exploration. They
recognised the power of scientists, like the brilliant experimenters, Isaac Newton and
Robert Boyle, to explain through observation. Observing events and gaining
knowledge by inductive inference must be the only means by which we can discover
truth.
But George Berkeley even became worried about the very existence of any material
object outside the content of the mind. When we put our hands near a fire, we feel
pain; when we put sugar in our mouths, we experience pleasure. But no one could
claim that fire contains pain or sugar pleasure. Then why should one think that any of

4

our other sensations, of shape and colour, of loudness and tone, originate in the
material properties of objects? By comparison with Descartes’ dictum, Cogito, ergo
sum, Berkeley retorted: Esse est percipi—to exist is to be perceived. But Bishop
Berkeley did not conclude that objects disappeared when he turned his back on them,
nor that his bedroom disintegrated when he blew his candle out. They must continue
to exist because they are always observed by somebody else, someone who has to be
everywhere at once. This theory of solipsism is admirably summarised in the famous
limerick of Ronald Knox and its reply:
There once was a man who said,’ God
Must find it exceedingly odd
If he finds that this tree
Continues to be
When there’s no one about in the quad.’
Dear Sir, your astonishment’s odd.
I am always about in the quad,
And that’s why the tree
Will continue to be
Since observed by
Yours faithfully, God.
The problem of internal inference about the world, posed by Descartes, is certainly
not solved even by modern brain research. Descartes himself avoided it neatly by
imagining sensory nerves from the eyes, the ears and the skin all terminating around
an enigmatic pimple on the back of the brain—the pineal gland—which he proposed
as the principal home of the soul and whose true function is still unknown. Simply
contacting the soul in this physical manner was enough: the soul was responsible for
the actual seeing, hearing and feeling. The activity produced by signals from the two
eyes was even fused together to provide a convenient single picture of the world,
which was twisted around to turn the inverted retinal image the right way up again.
But this is no solution, of course. It merely puts the task of recognition one step
farther on. There is no little man in the human brain to rush around looking at the
signals from the senses. If there were, how would his eyes and ears work? Yet much
of the physiological investigation of the brain has been concerned with the Cartesian
problem of internal maps.
Like the cartographers of the earth, who were so active at the time, neurologists and
experimental physiologists in the second half of the last century were geographers of
the mind. The British neurologist, John Hughlings Jackson, working in London in the
1860s, discovered a new continent in the brain. Some of his epileptic patients had fits
that started with uncontrollable movements in one part of the body: the thumb on one
hand, one of the toes or a corner of the mouth—and always in the same place. Now,
epileptic convulsions are caused by irritation in the brain, and Hughlings Jackson
related the region of injury to the part of the body where the fits began. Thus he
discovered what is now called the motor cortex—a strip of brain tissue on the side of
the cerebral hemispheres which represents the muscles on the opposite side of the
body. The motor cortex is the keyboard of an instrument whose strings are the
muscles, which finally play the melody of movement.

5

Other explorers soon made maps in different parts of the cortex for each of the senses.
Directly behind the motor cortex is a second strip that receives a map of the entire
body surface from the receptors in the skin. Again, it is as if the shape of the body
were drawn out on the surface of the brain. And what do the physiologists call this
body map? The homunculus! The little man! As if this picture of the body solved the
paradox of Descartes!
But the cortical homunculus is a strangely inaccurate map. In it, there is much more
space devoted to man’s face, his thumbs and his fingers than to his trunk and the
surface of his legs. When Edgar Adrian, now Lord Adrian of Cambridge, recorded
electrical activity from the touch area in the pig’s cortex, he found an even odder
map—a porcunculus, I suppose it should be called. An enormous fraction of the pig’s
touch area is dedicated to its snout. And in a mouse, the whiskers occupy most of the
touch cortex. The principle seems to be that the most important and sensitive areas of
the body are most generously represented in the map.
But not just the surface of the skin is sensed within the cortex. The very existence of
the body is registered there as well. Injuries behind the touch area, in the parietal lobe,
produce a most extraordinary disturbance of the relationship between body and mind.
The opposite side of the body is simply lost to its owner’s consciousness. It hangs as
an unwanted parasite on his conceptual self. Patients with a damaged parietal lobe
shave only one side of their lace, comb only half of their hair and they object to
sharing their hospital bed with what they feel to be somebody else’s arms and legs.
The eminent Russian neurologist Alexander Lucia transcribed the thoughts of a
soldier, Lev Zassetsky, who was injured in this part of his brain during the Second
World War:
Suddenly, I’ll come to, look to the right of me, and be horrified to
discover half of my body is gone, I’m terrified; I try to figure out
what’s become of my right arm and leg, the entire right side of my
body. I move the fingers of ray left hand, feel them, but can’t see
the fingers of my right hand and, somehow, I’m not even aware
they’re there…Often, I even forget where my forearm or buttocks
are and have to think of what these two words refer to. I know
what the word ‘shoulder’ means and that the word ‘forearm’ is
closely related to it. But I always forget where my forearm is
located. Is it near my neck or my hands…?
If we are to believe the existentialist writer, Jean-Paul Sartre, this personal sense of
bodily existence can also be lost in the depths of terror. In his short story Wall, Sartre
describes the sensations of a man awaiting execution during the Spanish Civil War:
My body, I saw with its eyes, I heard with its ears, but it was no
longer me.
I had to touch it and look at it to find out what was happening, as if
it were the body of someone else...
Most of the time it was quiet and I felt no more than a sort of
weight, a filthy presence against me.

6

Perhaps the most extraordinary map in the brain is the visual one, which Hermann
Munk and Gordon Holmes first started to chart: in fact, there is not just one map of
the visual world, but perhaps a dozen or more in a monkey, and presumably also in
man. This amazing array of charts at the back of the cortex is a veritable atlas of the
world of vision. Each map has a different scale and, like the various pages in a real
atlas, showing geological structure, demographic data, rainfall and so on, the visual
maps each emphasise a different component—colour in one, shape in another,movement in a third. Each time the eyes shift their gaze, a new torrent of information
pours through this labyrinth of maps.
Any injury to an individual portion of this visual atlas, beyond the primary area of
Holmes and Munk, causes a partial loss of the description of the visual world—a kind
of scotoma of knowledge. Damage in one place can abolish colour perception alone;
in another, the ability to see more than one thing at a time is lost; in another, whole
objects cannot be recognised, although all their individual parts are seen quite
normally. And fin-ally, brain damage can even steal the capacity to interpret a real
map—the concepts of space are destroyed and the patient is lost even in hi’s own
home.
But just as a real map is not the country that it portrays, so the sensory maps in the
brain are not explanations for the objects of our perceptual world. For the source of
knowledge, for the solution to Descartes’ dilemma, we must look within the maps, at
the nerve cells of which they are made—the neurons of knowledge. There are more
than 10,000 million nerve cells in the human brain. Each cubic inch of the cerebral
cortex probably contains more than 10,000 miles of nerve fibres, connecting the cells
together. If the cells and fibres in one human brain were all stretched out end to end,
they would certainly reach to the moon and back. Yet the fact that they are not
arranged end to end enabled man to go there himself. The astonishing tangle within
our heads makes us what we are. Every cell in the cortex receives on its surface an
average of several thousand terminals from the fibres of other cells. The richness of
interconnection makes each neuron a Cartesian soul.
Lord Adrian made the first electrical recordings of the activity of individual nerve
fibres, at Cambridge, in 1926. He discovered a universal law, one whose influence
will, in the long run, be as important as Newton’s laws of motion, for it would be
impossible to understand the brain without this law: neurons communicate with each
other by sending bursts of brief electrical pulses along their fibres. The pulses don’t
vary in size, but only in the frequency of their bursts, which can be up to 1,000
impulses in a second.
In the visual system, nerve cells look out at the world through their connections from
the 100 million or so receptors in each eye. When physiologist’s turned their
recording microelectrodes on to these visual neurons, the results were a revelation; for
each cell seemed not to be passively signalling the brightness or darkness of the
retina, as we might expect, but to be searching for meaningful combinations of
features, for the boundaries and shapes in the image that define the edges of objects.
One of the most remarkable of such experiments was reported in 1959 by the
American, Jerome Lettvin, and his colleagues, in a scientific paper, already a classic,
entitled: ‘What the frog’s eye tells the frog’s brain.’ They recorded impulses from
fibres in the frog’s optic nerve and found that different classes of fibres would only

7

respond with a burst of impulses if an appropriate pattern was projected on a screen in
front of the eye.
In other words, the eye has a language for its soliloquy to the brain. It speaks in
symbols that define the important features of the visual scene. In the frog’s optic
nerve, to quote Lettvin, one class of fibre responds only ‘to a small object passed
through the field; the response does not outlast the passage…the discharge is greater
the greater the convexity…of the boundary of the dark object…A smooth motion has
less effect than a jerky one…We have been tempted to call ‘them “bug perceivers”.
In the primary visual cortex of a monkey, neurons respond selectively to straight lines
appearing in the visual field. Different cells signal different orientations of line., Each
shape falling on the retina is described by the activity of these various line detectors,
In the other visual areas of the cortex the combinations of activity from these linedetecting cells produce neurons that require the shape of a corner, or a particular type
of movement or even the outline shape of a monkey’s hand, appearing in the field, to
make them spit out their spluttering messages to the rest of the brain.
The language of vision has a slightly different dialect for every species. The octopus
probably has no ‘word’ for a diagonal line: it can only detect horizontal and vertical
ones. Many animals have little or no ability to discriminate colour. But equally, some
other species have nerve cells that can describe events that are invisible to us,
Some animas can detect the plane of polarisation of light or the direction of a
magnetic field. We deceive ourselves if we think that our perceptual world is
complete. It is what our neurons are able to tell us.
We seem driven to say that such neurons have knowledge. They have intelligence for
they are able to estimate the probability of outside events—event that are important to
the animal in question. And the brain gains its knowledge by a process analogous to
the inductive reasoning of the classical scientific method. Neurons present arguments
to the brain based on the specific features that they detect, arguments on which the
brain constructs its hypothesis of perception. It was Francis Bacon, founder of the
philosophical school of empiricism, who first recommended clearly the inductive
method for the formulation of scientific theories. The classical method of science was
surely inspired by the example of human perception!
Indeed, science itself can be regarded as a cultural extension of the biological process
of acquiring knowledge. But even perception can’t proceed without expectations, built
into the brain in the form of the experiences with which it is familiar.
Equally, science has not progressed by induction alone. The anticipatio mentis, the
prejudice of insight, which Francis Bacon so much detested, is an essential part of
science, just as it is of human perception.
Expectation is at least partly based on the memory of past experience, and that is the
topic I shall turn to in my next lecture.

8

