REITH LECTURES 1976: Mechanics of the Mind
Colin Blakemore
Lecture 5: A Burning Fire
TRANSMISSION: 8 December 1976 – Radio 4

A few years ago, in the small town of Norman, Oklahoma, a reporter from the New
York Times had a brief conversation with a little girl called Lucy.
He held up a key and asked: ‘What is this?
‘Key,’ Lucy replied.
Then he picked up a comb: ‘What’s this?’
‘Comb,’ answered Lucy, as She took it from his hands and proceeded to comb his
hair. She stopped.
‘Comb me,’ she pleaded.
‘OK,’ he said, and combed her.
‘Lucy, you want to go outside?’ he suggested.
She thought for a while and then replied: ‘Outside, no. Want food - apple.’
‘I have no food,’ he apologised, ‘Sorry.’
A singularly unremarkable dialogue, one might think; indeed, the girl seemed rather
backward in her grammar. But the conversation was not spoken; it was conducted
with a series of hand movements, in American Sign Language for the deaf. Lucy is
not deal, however; she is a chimpanzee, with human foster-parents. She is a member
of a small and elite group of apes who are, unknowingly, excavating the foundations
on which man has built the myth of his biological uniqueness.
The attempt to teach language to apes has a history of at least 50 years, but early
efforts foundered because they sought to persuade chimpanzees to do something that
they simply cannot do—to speak. Most of these animals were reared alongside the
experimenters’ own babies, and they proved more than a match for their human infant
companions, in both agility and intellect, until the baby ‘naked apes ‘began to speak.
Then, apparently repeating the evolutionary history of man, the human infants soon
outstripped their simian companions. The failure of chimpanzees to talk seemed to
betray a fundamental barrier in their ability to think, and to bestow a special status on
the intelligence of man.
According to René Descartes, what man has, besides an animal’s clockwork brain, is
a rational soul. And a distinguishing feature of that rational soul is the capacity for
propositional speech—the synthesis of words into statements that, by their form, give
extra meaning to those words. Descartes’ supreme role for language is echoed in the
opinion of successive philosophers and biologists who searched for special
characteristics that might explain man’s phenomenal cultural progress.
The more that ethologists have learned about the apes, however, the shorter has
become the list of supposedly unique human attributes. The use of tools and the
solution of problems by insight can no longer be considered as defining features of

1

man. Virtually the only things that can be defended as uniquely human traits are his
continuous sexual appetite, his formal taboo on incest, and his language. Algernon
Swinburne once called human speech ‘a burning fire’, and there can be no doubt that
the use of language was just as important in human evolution as the discovery of
flame itself. But now the experiments with American sign language threaten to force
man to share this ultimate cultural crown with the apes.
Two American psychologists, Allen and Beatrice Gardner, started the project, in
Nevada, in 1966. The first scholar in their academy for apes was a one-year-old
chimpanzee called Washoe, whom they kept in a luxurious caravan, surrounded by
obsequious attendants who constantly talked to her and to each other in hand
language. By the age of five, Washoe had learned the gestural signs for nearly 200
words, including adjectives and verbs as well as nouns. But words alone do not make
propositional speech. Were the words made into the flesh of a genuine language? Did
Washoe manipulate her manual lexicon within the framework of a true grammar?
That question is still being fiercely contested among professional linguists, but I think
that the evidence is overwhelming that Washoe has acquired a language, primitive but
not fundamentally different from our own.
First, consider the nature of words themselves. Each spoken language consists of a
relatively small number of distinguishable sounds called phonemes—usually about 40
or 50 of them—like the ‘ch’ and the ‘p’ in ‘chimpanzee’. The first thing that a
legitimate language must do is to use units like phonemes in combination to generate
a potentially infinite variety of words.
There is no certain evidence at the moment that any natural animal communication
systems—bird songs, insect dances or the individual smells of mammals, for
instance—have the richness created by arbitrarily combining elementary signals into a
multitude of meanings.
Now, Washoe and Lucy, the chimpanzees who can talk with their hands, were never
expected to create their own meaningful gestures from a combination of meaningless
fragments of movement, any more than a child learns phonemes and then synthesises
words. And yet these chimpanzees have spontaneously invented a few signs of their
own, suggesting that they understand the principle of combining ‘gestural phonemes’.
Washoe, for example, signalled for her bib by drawing its outline on her chest. This
is, in fact, the correct sign for ‘bib’ in American Sign Language, though the Gardners
did not know it at the time. Lucy also used a kind of gestural onomatopoeia in her
invented word for the halter that she has to wear during walks: she mimes the act of
putting on the leash, and often precedes it by the gesture for ‘dirty’, just to indicate
her disgust at having to wear it.
Even more interesting is the way in which Washoe and Lucy couple their limited
stocks of words together to manufacture new ones. According to Lucy, a water-melon
is a ‘drink-fruit’ or a ‘candy- drink’ and a strong radish is ‘cry-hurt- food’. And even
though she has been taught a single gesture for ‘refrigerator’, Washoe prefers to call it
an ‘open-food-drink’. Is this true linguistic resourcefulness, approaching the human
use of language to classify phenomena and hence to comprehend the world? Perhaps.
It is certainly more than the pairing of a response with an object or picture.

2

But sceptics might still say that these apes do nothing more than perform associations
like one of Pavlov’s dogs or Skinner’s rats. A word, used by a man, is much more
than a label attached to a particular action or thing. It is the product of a cognitive
analysis in which things are recognised as members of classes.
Think how difficult it would be to explain to a visitor from space just why fourlegged animals that bark, that have fur and that wag their tails, are usually called
‘dogs’, and then why it is that not all animals we call dogs have exactly the same kind
of fur, why it is some dogs don’t bark and why it is others have no tails. Each time
that we say ‘I see a dog’, we are performing an exercise in logic of staggering
complexity; the immediate characteristics of the object we see are checked against the
salient common features of all previously encountered dogs in our internal model of
‘dogginess’. Words, then, are general postulates derived through specific examples;
they are the result of powerful inductive reasoning. But they have deductive
consequences with predictive force. Thus they are used to classify objects that have
never been experienced before and to deduce the expected properties and actions of
those objects.
Just as the deductive consequences of a scientific hypothesis predict the outcome of
particular experiments, so words are theories about objects. The capacity to use words
to classify, and hence to prophesy, must have been of immense value in man’s
struggle to understand and ultimately to control his environment. Some would say that
language has actually formed the way in which we think, and that linguistic
classification is the basis of a uniquely human mode of thought. As a little girl once
said to Graham Walias, the author of The Art of Thought: ‘How can I know what I
think till I see what I say?’
Perhaps animals cannot generalise from experiences into concepts, because they lack
the advantage of linguistically- moulded thought.
Take the case of another chimpanzee, Rafael by name, who was being studied by
Pavlov’s group of research workers. Rafael had learned to use a jar of water, drawn
from a tap in a barrel, to extinguish a burning wick that blocked his way to food. He
could also use a bamboo pole as a bridge to cross from one raft, floating on a lake, to
another one nearby. One sweltering summer’s day, Rafael sat on a raft cooling
himself by collecting water from the lake with his hands and pouring it over his head.
One of the experimenters rowed across to Rafael’s raft, put some fruit at one end and
a burning wick to block Rafael’s way. On a neighbouring raft stood the familiar water
barrel.
Rafael surveyed the scene; suddenly, in a flash of inspiration, he threw his bamboo
pole across to the other raft, struggled over it, filled his jar from the tap in the barrel,
climbed back, put out the fire and swallowed the fruit! But this pinnacle of insight
was an abyss of stupidity. Any person would have doused the fire with the same
source of water that Rafael had been using to soak himself. But to Rafael they were
not the same thing: he seemed to have no general concept of ‘water’. He had no
internal word for it.
On the other hand, Washoe and friends have passed this test of generalisation.
Washoe uses the sign ‘dog’ for dogs in pictures as well as real ones. And though she

3

learned the gesture meaning ‘open’ for the door of her home, she soon applied it to
boxes and bottles as well.
Even with words, even with generalisation, no language is a language with words
alone. The semantics of a statement - its meaning - depends on the syntax of its
structure. Even ten words could make a language, but without grammar they would be
nothing but an impoverished dictionary. Only by the order and relationships of words
in sentences can we free our utterances from the prison of the present moment and
talk of the past or of the future. The property of displacement— communicating
events that are remote in time or place - is fundamental to true language: and
displacement in language rests on the extra dimension that grammar gives to words.
It is true that some of the acts of natural animal communication do have the rudiments
of displacement. The frenzied kissing ceremony of a pack of African wild dogs,
before it starts to hunt, is an emotional discussion about future events. The biologist,
Edward Wilson, translates their imagined conversation as: ‘I submerge my identity…I
will do my share of the hunting, I will share in the feeding. Let’s go! Let’s go!’
But the fragments of displacement in animal communication are still merely
stereotyped expressions of the animals’ immediate needs. They are almost trivial
compared with the power of human language to lift man out of the grip of his
emotions, to let him conjecture, plan and explain.
Again, as with words, the structure of grammar reveals the machinery of the human
mind—the analysis of events into sequences of actions. Indeed, one of the major
tenets of modern linguistics is that most of ‘the rules of grammar operate
independently of meaning. In his revolutionary theory of syntax, Noam Chomsky,
claimed that people have within them an innate, universal system of syntax which
makes them competent to learn to understand and to generate speech. This knowledge
is the prerequisite for any human language. It comprises ‘the laws that govern the
formation of elementary sentences; these ‘deep structures’ are propositional
descriptions which are transformed into the permissible utterances of a particular
language by a set of grammatical rules. As the Duchess in Wonderland said to Alice:
‘Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves.’
The following sentence recently opened an important review article in the scientific
journal, Nature: ‘…hadrons consist of quarks bound by vector gluons.’
The statement is clearly grammatical: it obeys the rules of English sentence structure.
But it is meaningless without knowledge of the vocabulary of modern particle
physics. Chomsky himself uses the semantically nonsensical but syntactically perfect
sentence. ‘Colourless green ideas sleep furiously’ to illustrate the concept that much
of grammatical structure is independent of meaning.
It is here, at the question of grammar, that the interpretation of Washoe’s
achievements becomes most controversial. In 1969, the Gardners wrote: ‘From the
time she had eight or ten signs in her repertoire, Washoe began to use them in strings
of two or more…Some of the combined forms that Washoe has used may have been
imitative, but many have been inventions of her own.’

4

To begin with, most of Washoe’s ‘sentences’ consisted of only a pair of signs, but
even these two-word phrases like ‘hurry open’, ‘more tickle’ and ‘Roger come’,
seemed to have much of the same kind of elementary grammar that children use when
they first combine pairs of words: Washoe was less than two years old at the time—
just about the age when children first add words together.
In children’s speech, the cultural individuality of the native language begins to
emerge when three words are first put together. And just ten months after she joined
Allen and Beatrice Gardner, Washoe began combining three or more signs. At first,
she tended to put both subject and object before the verb, as in ‘Roger Washoe tickle’,
and made other mixtures that would be errors in word- order in English, like ‘You out
go’. But her manual conversations have gradually settled into a pattern ratherlike that
of English. She nearly always puts the subject before the verb, and is quite capable of
detecting differences in meaning from changes in order, such as ‘You tickle me’ and
‘Me tickle you’. In short, Washoe and her friends are slowly but surely tracing the
path that leads to real language. If propositional language is the qualification needed
for membership in humanity, then Washoe seems to be eligible, at least as much as a
two-year-old child!
What should we make, then, of Chomsky’s suggestion that the formal properties of
language are not only unique to man but are innately determined—a behavioural
expression of a genetically inherited structure in the brain?
Is a baby, as Ronald Knox would have us believe, ‘a loud noise at one end and no
sense of responsibility at the other’? Or is it an articulate human creature, struggling
to escape from a speechless skin? Chomsky points out that children make
grammatically sensible errors, such as ‘two sheeps’ and ‘Mummy sitted’, showing
that they apply syntactical rules and do not simply learn every utterance individually.
And he thinks that the complexity of grammar (which seems to defy mere learning),
and the fact that all languages may have a common ‘deep structure’ point to an
inherited basis. However, there is no a priori reason why learning should not produce
organisation in the brain as complex as the mechanism of inheritance. And the
common ‘deep structure’ of languages may not necessarily reflect an identical origin
in human genes. It could be that the problem of communicating propositional
thoughts is so elaborate that only one solution is possible, and that it has been reached
independently, through cultural transmission and enrichment, in all societies.
It is true that any child can learn any tongue, as long as he starts early enough. But it
is almost certain that children would develop no language at all without continuous
and lengthy lessons from an expert. There is, in fact, a critical period during which an
infant’s developing brain is able to master, by experience, the skill of talking. If he
has no contact with speaking people before the age of about seven years old, a child
will have the greatest difficulty in learning language later on. In classical imperial
Japan, an infant was not considered to be human until it was seven years old, and
could be abandoned by its parents with impenitence and without fear of retribution.
How remarkably Cartesian this custom seems! Not until a child had passed through
the critical time for acquisition of language was it truly a human being.
Again, damage to the brain almost never causes irreversible loss of language in a
child still within the critical age. But, sadly, irremediable loss is a common

5

consequence of brain injury in adults. The clinical study of language began in earnest
with a remarkable piece of scientific prediction. At a stormy meeting of the Société
d’Anthropologie in Paris, on 4 April 1861, Simon Auburtin announced his conviction
that the power of speech is localised in the frontal lobes of the cerebral hemispheres.
His own clinical evidence was slight, but he predicted that any patient, who lost the
power of speech, though not the ability to understand it, would be found, if his brain
were examined, to have damage or degeneration in the frontal lobes.
The secretary of the meeting, was a surgeon, Pierre Paul Broca, and just a few days
later he came across a patient who for years had suffered from weakness in the right
side of his body and a virtually total inability to speak. Almost the only sound that he
could utter was ‘tan’ and this has become his name in the annals of medical history.
Tan died on 17 April 1861, and immediately carried out a post-mortem examination.
The very next day, he reported the result to the Société d’Anthropologie. Auburtin’s
premonition was substantiated: the frontal lobes of Tan’s brain had degenerated
severely.
Two years later, Broca had seen several more eases and he wrote: ‘Here are eight
instances in which the injury was in the posterior third of the third frontal
convolution. And the most remarkable thing is that, in all the patients, the injury was
on the left side. I do not dare draw conclusions from this. I await new facts.’
The conclusion that Broca did not dare to draw is the one that is now widely accepted:
the mental mechanism for speech is nearly always localised on the left side of the
brain. Now, there had been speculation even in ancient times that movement in one
half of the body is controlled by the opposite half of the brain. Tan’s right-sided
muscular weakness was due to the degeneration that affected the motor area in his left
frontal lobe. The speech area, which now bears Broca’s name, is close by, but
separate from, the part of the motor cortex that controls movements of the tongue and
larynx.
The British neurologist, John Hughlings Jackson, pointed out that speech could suffer
without any paralysis of the tongue, lips or palate, and, indeed, that some aspects of
speech could be lost without others. He described the case of the daughter of his
driver who was taking him to school when he was a boy. She suddenly became almost
dumb during the journey and they returned home. Hughlings Jackson wrote: ‘I
remember being struck by a self-contradictory expression made use of by the patient.
She said: “I can’t talk”…She gradually lost speech altogether…For three weeks, she
did not utter a word, but was apparently conscious…The first word she ever uttered
was in reply to a question—she said “waistcoat”. It had no bearing on the question.’
Another British neurologist, Sir Henry Head, working after the turn of the century,
described a patient who could understand most questions and if his answer was ‘Yes’,
could say so; but he could never say ‘No’. Instead, he would simply say ‘Damn!’
In 1874, Carl Wernicke discovered that damage farther back in the left cerebral
hemisphere, mainly in the temporal lobe, can cause a loss in the understanding of the
spoken and written word, with less disturbance of speech itself. This region of the
brain, now known as Wernicke’s area, lies close to the auditory cortex, which
analyses sound. In the majority of people, this region is actually bigger on the left side

6

than on the right, and this is true even in newborn babies. Could this kind of
anatomical asymmetry be the material expression of Chomsky’s innate capacity for
human language? If so, then it is difficult to explain why a young child can apparently
develop the speech mechanisms in his right hemisphere if the left side is damaged;
and even harder to explain the fact that gorillas and chimpanzees have the same
anatomical asymmetry, though Chomsky would deny them the capacity for language.
There is no denying, of course, that speech seems to outstrip in complexity any animal
communication system that we understand. But I wonder if we are not missing
immense subtlety in the behaviour of animals. Indeed, it is inconceivable, as
Chomsky points out, that monkeys and apes have the capacity for language but have
simply never put it to use. Perhaps they do use it, but we can’t comprehend them.
Take, for instance, this description of an encounter between two male lemurs, usually
considered rather primitive primates:
The lemur stares towards the other animal. He draws his upper lip
forward and down, so that it covers the points of his canines and
protrudes somewhat below the lower jaw…but the lips are tense and
do not droop. The expression probably flares the nostrils. He may
either squeal or purr. He then stands on all fours with his tail arched
over his back, its tip just above his head. He quivers the tail violently
shaking its odour forward.
Are we any better equipped to interpret the syntax of this message than the lemur is to
decipher our speech? Even the most ceremonial communication by animals appears to
us to be stereotyped and thus lacking in rich information content, but we may be
unable to comprehend the variety of signals available through the combination of
different modes of expression—like movement, smell, touch and vocalisation. But
speech, as the vehicle of our language, is unique to man. How could speaking itself
possibly have evolved?
The answer might lie, like the key to so much of man’s development, in his bipedal
posture and the increasing skill and sensitivity of his hands, freed from the drudgery
of weight-bearing or swinging through the trees. The precision grip of man’s hands
matured over the period between five million and two and a half million years ago,
and, during that time, his brain doubled in size, perhaps to accommodate the
increasingly sophisticated mechanisms for planning and controlling individual
movements of the fingers and, even more, the skilled sequences of hand and body
movement needed for inventiveness in the manipulation of objects.
The earliest stone tools yet discovered date from the end of this period, and so, I
suspect, does the flowering of language, though not speech. Perhaps man suddenly
found that his newly-nimble fingers and the computational power of his brain allowed
him to expand and enrich one aspect of the communication of his primate ancestors,
the very one that Washoe and Lucy have learned to exploit—gesture. The blossoming
of communication in early man might have involved a florid system of gestural
signalling with hands and face, even including music-making and dance.
Now, one disadvantage of communication by gesture is that it demands constant
visual attention from the receiver of the signal. There would have been considerable

7

benefit if one of the hands had become specialised for transmitting messages, so that
anyone watching for a signal could reliably predict from what direction it would
come. This might have been the reason for the appearance of general left cerebral
dominance, and hence right-handedness.
A recent experimental observation bears on this theory of the gestural origin of human
communication. Just as the growth of a human embryo seems to be a cryptic summary
of man’s biological evolution, so the development of language in the human infant
may include the cultural predecessor of speech; for very young babies, before they
can speak, seem to communicate mainly through gesticulation and expressive
movements of the face.
The explosive development of speech itself may have happened only 100,000 years or
less before the present time (a mere moment ago in evolutionary terms). The gradual
transition from a meat- hunting and plant-gathering lifestyle to a society based on
agriculture must have put increasing emphasis on the ability to make long-term plans
and to consult past experiences. No doubt man had always added his inherited stock
of primate vocalisations to his gestural conversations to give them emotional force,
the bold new step was to exploit this repertoire of sounds and to bestow on it the
grammatical power that had already been developed first for the construction of tools
and then for the gestural communication.
There are several legendary tales of the search for the origin of man’s language.
Psammetichus, a Pharaoh of Egypt, is said to have had two newborn infants reared by
a silent shepherd who fed them with goat’s milk. According to the tale, they taught
themselves to say the word ‘becos’, which Psammetichus discovered was the
Phrygian word for ‘bread’. James IV of Scotland is supposed to have done a similar
experiment, and his pair of ‘bairnes’ came out speaking ‘guid Hebrew’.
But the most convincing story of all is of the Mogul emperor, Akbar Khan, who
interned 12 babies with dumb nurses in a castle six leagues from Akbar’s capital of
Agra. ‘When the children were 12 years old,’ wrote the Jesuit, Father Catrou, in 1705,
‘he had them brought before him, and collected in his palace men skilled in all
languages . . . When, however, the children appeared before the emperor, everyone
was astonished to find that they did not speak any language at all. They had learnt
from their nurses to do without any, and they merely expressed their thoughts by
gestures which answered the purposes of words. Perhaps Akbar’s 12 infants had
discovered the true origin of human language.
In my final lecture, I shall consider the motives of brain research and the benefits and
dangers that lie in the future of this science.

8

