REITH LECTURES 1976: Mechanics of the Mind
Colin Blakemore
Lecture 1: The Divinest Part of Us
TRANSMISSION: 10 November 1976 – Radio 4

1848 was a year of revolution in Europe; Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels published
the Communist Manifesto, and political demonstrations tore apart the great cities of
Paris, Vienna, Naples and Berlin. That same year, in New England, a bizarre accident
touched off a minor revolution of a different sort—not a radical change in man’s
attitude to man, but a turning point in his understanding of that part of man which
fosters social conscience: his mind.
The accident occurred at about 4.30 in the afternoon of 13 September 1848, near the
small town of Cavendish, Vermont. A gang of men, under the direction of their
energetic and likeable foreman, 25-year- old Phineas P. Gage, was working on the
new line of the Rutland and Burlington railroad. They were about to blast a rock that
blocked their way, and Phineas himself took charge of the delicate business of
pouring gunpowder into a deep, narrow hole drilled in the stone. The powder in place,
he rammed in a long, iron rod to tamp down the charge.
But the tamping-iron rubbed against the side of the shaft, and a spark ignited the
powder. The massive rod, three and a half feet long, an inch and a quarter in diameter,
weighing 13 pounds, shot from the hole under the force of the explosion. This terrible
missile struck Phineas Gage just beneath his left eye and, in a fraction of time, tore
through his skull, departed from a hole in the top of his head, and finally landed some
50 yards away.
Believe it or not, that was not the end of Phineas P. Gage—at least, not of the body
that bore his name. He was thrown to the ground, and his feet and hands twitched
convulsively; but within minutes, he was conscious again, and able to speak. The
other workmen carried him gently to an ox-cart nearby, and he rode for three quarters
of a mile, sitting upright, to an hotel in the town. With little assistance, Phineas
stepped from the cart, climbed a long flight of stairs to a room, where his awful
injuries were dressed, and he awaited the arrival of the local physicians. The two
doctors could hardly believe the incredible tale until, like Doubting Thomas, they
examined his wounds themselves.
At ten o’clock that same evening, though the bleeding was still terrible, Phineas was
rational enough to say that he did not need to see his friends, because he should be
back at work within a couple of days. There could be no doubt that a large metal rod
had passed completely through the part of his brain that filled his forehead, yet his
senses and speech were normal, and his memory apparently unimpaired.
The next few days were difficult. The wound became infected, and Phineas was
anaemic and delirious, but with liberal doses of calomel, rhubarb and castor oil, he
slowly improved, and after three weeks, he called for his trousers and was eager to

1

escape from his bed. By the middle of November, two months after the accident, he
was wandering about the town, planning his new future. And here is the point of this
curious tale. Phineas Gage had a new future, for he was a different man. The efficient
and capable foreman no longer existed; the friendly, considerate Phineas Gage was
dead, and in his place rose a childlike phoenix with the strength of an ox and an evil
temper to match it.
Years later, John Harlow, one of the two doctors who had originally attended him,
wrote: ‘His physical health is good, and I am inclined to say that he has recovered.
The equilibrium, or balance, so to speak, between his intellectual faculties and animal
propensities, seems to have been destroyed. He is fitful, irreverent, indulging at times
in the grossest profanity. In this regard, his mind was radically changed, so decidedly
that his friends and acquaintances said that he was “no longer Gage.”’
The new Phineas Gage was rejected by his previous employers, and he drifted around
the United States and South America exhibiting himself, and the tamping-iron that
had twisted his mind, as a fairground attraction. He died in San Francisco, but his
skull and iron rod are still on display to the public, in the museum of Harvard Medical
School.
News of the metamorphosis of Phineas Gage reached the ears of the medical world in
the 1860s; and it could not have come at a more crucial time. It seemed the final piece
to the jigsaw-puzzle of the mind. The idea that different mental functions are localised
in various parts of the tissue of the brain was becoming a dominant one. The rapid
historical movement towards this opinion was started by a long-discredited Viennese
physician, Franz Joseph Gall. As a boy, Gall had noticed that a number of
acquaintances with particularly good memories also had large, protruding eyes. ‘I was
forced to the idea,’ he wrote in 1812, ‘that eyes so formed are the mark of an excellent
memory. Why should not the other faculties also have their visible external
characteristics?’ ‘From this time, all the individuals who were distinguished by any
quality or faculty became the object of my special attention, and of systematic study
as to the form of the head.’
Gall travelled to foundling homes, prisons and lunatic asylums in his search for
people with extraordinary heads, and built up a huge anecdotal catalogue of the
relationship between particular mental characteristics and bumps on the skull,
including an especially amorous lady friend with exceptional protuberances behind
the ears. Armed with this motley index of skull bumps, Gall conceived the theory of
phrenology. He argued that all the faculties of the mind, even moral and intellectual,
are inherited in each person—a view received quite sympathetically by early
Victorian society. Moreover, each characteristic must be controlled by a separate,
innately localised ‘organ’, within the great cerebral hemispheres of the brain, directly
beneath the skull. This pseudo-science was an ungainly child, fruit of the union
between inchoate anatomy and the Romantic movement, with its fascination for the
analysis of character.
An analogy can be drawn between the scientific methods of the phrenologists and
Charles Darwin’s purely descriptive evidence for his theory of natural selection. But
unlike the hypothesis of evolution, phrenology was a bandwagon riding on a bumpy
road to scientific disgrace; it was entertained seriously only until the middle of the last

2

century. But it did shift the paradigm of science, in the terminology of Thomas Kuhn,
and prepared the way for the studies of great neurologists in London and Paris. They
observed the symptoms of human patients who had suffered circumscribed damage to
parts of the cerebral hemispheres, and suggested that the control of movement, the
sensations and even the power of speech were strictly localised in the brain.
The unfortunate Phineas Gage cemented this new phrenology. Even the imponderable
elements of the mind—responsibility, personality and compassion—must have their
machinery in the brain, in the frontal lobes that had been torn apart by the rod.
Of course, the relationship between injuries to the head and insult to the mind was
hardly a new discovery in the 19th century. Even the Hippocratic School of
physicians, who, 400 years before Christ, first challenged the ancient supernatural
concepts of illness, knew that the Sacred Disease of epilepsy, and madness itself, were
disturbances of the brain. They went so far as to say:
Not only our pleasure, our joy and our laughter, but also our sorrow,
pain, grief and tears arise from the brain, and the brain alone. With it,
we think and understand, see and hear, and we discriminate between
the ugly and the beautiful, between what is pleasant and what is
unpleasant and between good and evil.
While such a materialistic statement would be a perfectly acceptable preface to a
modern textbook on the brain, it was not generally accepted in ancient times. The
disagreement was not, however, about the materialistic assumptions that sustained
such speculation. The debate that raged, since at least the time that men first wrote
down those things that troubled them, was not about whether or not the mind had a
physical counterpart in the body, but where its embodiment might be.
It seems almost inconceivable today that anyone could ever doubt that man’s mind is
in his brain. For me, the ‘me-ness’ of me is undoubtedly situated about two inches
behind my eyes, in the very middle of my head. But I am sure that I feel this with
such confidence because I accept the currently fashionable scientific evidence that it
is so. To the ancient Egyptians, it was definitely somewhere else, for though they
entombed their dead leaders with all the tangible trappings of life, and tried to
preserve in perfect condition their bodily remains for the journey to Osiris, they dealt
summarily with the brain, by retracting it through the nose with a spoon. The baspirit
of an Egyptian mummy was not in his head, but in his-bowels and his heart.
At one time or another, almost every major organ in the body has been credited with
this ultimate organic privilege—the guardianship of the soul and of the sentiments
that make us men. The liver, blood- coloured and apparently the source of all veins,
played this special role for the Sumerians (the first people to write down their
thoughts), for the Assyrians and for the ancient people of Israel. ‘My liver shall sing
praise to Thee, and not be silent,’ the Psalmist wrote.
It is hardly surprising that the arrangement of blood vessels should have guided man
in his search for his soul. After all, what is a soul? It is a mover, an animator (that
word itself is derived from anima, the Latin for ‘soul’). And what could be more
necessary for the sustenance of movement than the free flow of warming blood

3

through the body? When blood was lost, then so was life. By this argument, the origin
of blood must be the source of life itself, and from this view sprang one of the most
enduring theories of biology— that the seat of the soul is the heart. Aristotle himself,
the greatest biologist in the ancient world, supported this idea, and it is still with us—
not in science perhaps, but certainly in poetry and in popular song, where the heart,
not the brain, yearns, aches and finally breaks.
Aristotle’s specific theory relegated the brain to the task of merely cooling blood from
the heart, which was itself the organ of thought and sensation. Aristotle’s great gift to
science was the method of observation. In this particular case, his own conclusions
were wrong, but by dissecting and describing what he saw, he questioned the value of
speculation based on pure reason, and hence invented the scientific method.
Like every good student, Aristotle had grown wise enough to know when his teacher
was wrong. He had been a student of Plato, who himself studied with Socrates and
founded the great Academy in Athensin about 387 BC. Plato virtually rejected
experiment, and even observation. He argued that, since our senses so obviously
deceive us, they are not to be trusted; true knowledge comes only from pure thought,
unadulterated by evidence. Mystical contemplation and the methods of mathematics
can discover the truth of everything. So Plato did not dissect, and only acquired
information about the body second-hand, from the Greek scholars of medicine living
in southern Italy. Yet it was Plato, not Aristotle, who championed the brain as the seat
of the soul. If it wasn’t genuine scientific evidence that led Plato to this choice, then
what did? The answer can be found in the social, political and cultural context in
which he lived.
Plato was a wealthy aristocrat who believed that leisure was essential to wisdom,
which was therefore automatically denied to the working poor. In Plato’s utopian
world, described in his Republic, society would be utterly hierarchical, with absolute
power by cultural inheritance in the hands of a minority of philosophers - the
Guardians. And just as the senses - the guardians of the body - could tell lies, so could
the government of Plato’s Republic. His concept of the universe, and of man’s mind
within it, was no less structured and hierarchical than his idealised intellectual
oligarchy. Without experiment and without empirical knowledge, Plato postulated
that the spiritual mind of man, the rational soul, is in his head. He believed that
mathematics is the essential mode of thought, and it was mathematics that led him to
succeed where Aristotle had failed, in deciding the location of the mind.
The perfect geometrical shape, he argued, is a sphere; the spherical earth rests within
the globes of the heavens, and at the centre of the entire living cosmos of Plato stands
man—the philosopher, of course. Where else could it be, the rational soul, ‘the
divinest part of us’, as Plato called it, but in the spherical head, the summit of the
human body?
Plato had another reason for choosing the head, a reason of much greater interest to
the scientist. He was trying to solve the central conundrum in biology—the mystery of
inheritance. To justify Plato’s political concept of eugenically-controlled status in
society, he proposed that a philosopher- king is likely to pass to his children the
elements of his rational mind, as well as the appearance of his body. Plato saw a
similarity between the substance of the brain itself and male semen.

4

Greek society at the time had little part for woman to play; she was but a flower-pot
for the seed of man, which—by Plato’s account—was derived from his brain.
Although Plato proposed equality for women in the intellectual competition of his
idealised Republic, he was usually less generous to her—for instance, when
discussing the transmigration of souls in his dialogue, the Timaeus. If a man lived
well, and overcame his animal emotions, he would, after death, be reborn in a star.
But if not, he would suffer the ignominy of re-creation as a woman. If she lived badly,
the wretched soul would find itself in an animal.
Persistence of the soul beyond mere physical death is an almost universal tenet of
religions and philosophies. It is not, I believe, an expression of man’s selfishness
alone; it is the inevitable cultural formulation of the most basic and most essential
requirement of any living thing—the desire to survive. In Darwin’s theory, it was
amply fulfilled by successful and abundant self- reproduction. To the egocentric
Platonists, reincarnation was needed, too.
The free movement of souls within Plato’s anthropocentric universe was possible
because the cosmos itself was alive. Pre-Newtonian mechanics demanded that
anything that moves must have a mover; the heavens themselves are in motion, and
therefore must be moved by a cosmic soul. Animals and plants must also have souls,
though lesser souls than the rational soul of man, and so, too, must the very substance
of the earth. The current interest in the defence of the environment and the attempt to
establish legal rights for mountain, wilderness and recreation areas is, in a sense, a
return to a Platonic view of the living cosmos.
Transmigration of the soul is not, however, an idea original to Plato, nor is his the
most extreme example of the hypothesis. Pythagoras, who probably founded
geometry with his theorem about the dimensions of right-angled triangles, thought
that, in a previous existence, he had been a bush. The religious philosophy of the
Pythagorean brotherhood seems laughable today. Two of their strict rules were that
one should pick up nothing that had been dropped, and that no one should ever eat
beans! However, as Bertrand Russell wrote: ‘Beginnings are apt to be crude, but their
originality should not be overlooked on this account.’ The rules of the Pythagorean
order were based on their fascination with the mysticism of numbers and geometry.
Though naive, this was the beginning of the fusion of science and everyday life.
There is even more reason to emphasise the importance of ancient Greek views about
the mechanism of mentality, particularly those of Plato and Aristotle. For their
opinions and their authority, sanctified and dogmatised by the early Christian fathers,
became the unquestionable truth that shackled the mind of man in the Middle Ages
and slowed the advance of civilisation to a hesitant crawl. By its monopoly of what
little education there was, the Church cultivated and perpetuated an extraordinary
model of the mind, that grew in complexity and richness, not by further observation or
even by genuine debate, but by the barren science of endlessly interpreting classical
ideas.
An incongruous marriage was arranged between the theories of Plato and Aristotle
and biblical dogma. It reconciled heart- centred and brain-centred views of the mind
by incorporating both organs in a great cognitive waterworks. Nutrients, absorbed

5

from the intestines, passed to the liver where a fluid called ‘natural spirit’ was formed;
this flowed to the heart where it became ‘vital spirit’, which pulsed towards a
marvellous network of blood vessels, the rete mirabile, at the base of the brain. Here,
it mixed with air inspired through the nose into the porous base of the skull.
The final product was a perfect distillation, called ‘animal spirit’ (again from the
Latin, anima), which was stored in the system of fluid-filled cavities, the ventricles,
running through the entire brain. This spirit, formed from the mixture of liquid and
air, was the essence of life and the source of all intellect. Could W. B. Yeats have had
this in mind when he said of a poem: ‘I made it out of a mouthful of air’?
The arrangement of the brain ventricles was known from the observations of the great
Greek anatomist, Galen of Bergama, in the second century AD, as interpreted by an
11th-century Persian writer, Ibn Sina, or Avicenna. There are four ventricles, but the
first two form a symmetrical pair within the large cerebral hemispheres at the front of
the brain. They communicate with the middle ventricle in the forebrain, which
connects through a narrow canal with the last ventricle in the stem of the brain.
This system of three connected compartments allowed the mediaevalists to give
tangible form to one of Plato’s important ideas: that the action of the mind proceeds
through a series of operations, from sensation to memory. The first pair of ventricles
was said to be the site of the sensus communis, the mechanism of sensory analysis,
which was connected with the nerves of the sense organs. Here, images were created
and passed on to the middle ventricle, which was the seat of reason (ratio), thought
(cognatio) or judgment (aestimatio). The final step was memory itself (memoria), in
the last ventricle.
This remarkable scheme persisted in written accounts and illustrations until the 17th
century, but it began to be questioned, as did so many areas of scientific authority, in
the Renaissance. Two men, in particular, broke the barriers of superstition, slipping
the progress of knowledge into higher gear. They were that symbol of the
Renaissance, Leonardo da Vinci, and the founder of modern philosophy, Descartes.
Leonardo is not distinguished principally as a scientist, nor as a mathematician, an
engineer, an architect, or even an artist. His most remarkable achievement, and the
thing that makes him, more than anyone, a Renaissance man, is the fact that he was all
of these. He had what is essential for progress, in art no less than in science: disbelief.
He didn’t believe that things could not be done, or that they should not be done,
because they had not been done before. ‘I wish to work miracles,’ he said. ‘I may
have fewer possessions than other men who are more tranquil and those who wish to
grow rich in a day.’ But his temerity and disregard for dogma brought him into
conflict with the Church, just as it did Galileo. ‘Whoever in discussion,’ wrote
Leonardo, ‘adduces authority: USES not his intellect, but rather memory.’ ‘Science
comes by observation, not by authority.’
In no field of endeavour was Leonardo’s dispute with the Church more bitter than in
his anatomical studies. To dissect the human body was not only to question the
absolute authority of the descriptions of Galen and Avicenna, but also to abuse the
sanctity of the human corpse. But Leonardo did dissect, both to learn how to make
better drawings and to understand the nature of the body as a perfect machine. News

6

of his experiments caused the Pope to withdraw his favour, and Leonardo was
compelled to leave Rome in 1515.
Now, in about 1490, Leonardo had drawn anatomical illustrations of the human head
and brain that incorporated the classical ventricular scheme, with the nerves from the
eyes connecting to the sensus communis in the first chamber. But curiosity prevailed
and, some time between 1504 and 1507, he performed a detailed dissection of the
brain of an ox. But how can one dissect a system of cavities? The ventricles are only
defined by the absence of brain tissue. Leonardo overcame this problem with typical
originality: he injected the ventricles of the brain with molten wax, waited for it to set
and dissected the tissue away from what remained—the first cast of the ventricles. No
doubt Leonardo’s experience with casting statues in bronze had prompted this
brilliant strategy.
What Leonardo saw forced him to reorchestrate the classical description of serial
processing in the brain, which had originated with Plato. He found that many of the
nerves from the sense organs did not arrive near the front pair of ventricles, but in the
tissue, now called the thalamus, around the middle ventricle. Even Leonardo did not
have the courage to leap from the conceptual cliff. The illustration that he drew was
accurate in form, but the names that he used to label the parts were classical ones. He
insisted, however, on moving the sensus communis to the middle ventricle, which in
the classical scheme had been occupied by the power of judgment. It is possible that
we owe to Leonardo our current usage of ‘common sense’ to mean reason and
judgment.
Though his Influence on scientific thought was slight, Leonardo had, symbolically,
broken Plato’s death grip on the science of the mind. In about 1510, Raphael painted
his mural devoted to philosophy in the Stanza della Segnatura, in the Vatican. It
shows Plato’s Academy in Athens, and in the centre, by the figure of Aristotle, stands
Plato himself, with a copy of the Timaeus in his hands. Many historians of art believe
that Raphael used, as his model for Plato, Leonardo da Vinci himself; certainly, the
resemblance to late self-portraits by Leonardo is striking. What irony that he should
have chosen Leonardo to represent the very man whose authority Leonardo so much
disliked!
René Descartes’ special contribution was not empirical, but conceptual. Like Plato,
he, too, doubted the reliability of his senses and, indeed, in 1637, he proposed that the
only admissible approach to the establishment of knowledge was to disregard all
beliefs about which there could be the slightest doubt. The first thing he found that he
could not doubt was his own existence as a thinking thing: Cogito ergo sum.
Descartes made a radical distinction between a mind - something known to itself with
immediate certainty—and a body—something whose very existence must be inferred
by experience. By its nature, the human body, even the entire nervous system, was a
mere machine. In this respect, there was nothing to distinguish between man and
beast. In the Traité de l’Homme, Descartes wrote:
I wish you to consider, finally, that all the functions which I attribute
to this machine, such as waking and sleeping, the reception of light,
sounds, odours - I desire, I say, that you consider that these functions

7

occur naturally in this machine solely by the disposition of its
organs, not less than the movements of a clock.
Descartes had split the body and the mind, but certainly did not abandon the latter, He
was a devout Jesuit, and had even decided against publishing his theory of an Infinite
universe when he heard of the first condemnation of Galileo in 1616. No, for
Descartes, the rational soul or mind was the only thing that separated man from the
animals.
Descartes’ achievement was to make explicit the principle of dualism, that the bodily
functions of the brain are entirely distinct from the mystical domain of the soul.
Dualism has served its purpose, though it still haunts the terminology of brain
research, and feeds the common belief that there is some magic in the mind. But in its
time, dualism was a liberating dictum; it freed men, even devout men, to speculate
about the working substance of the brain, without fear of treading in the footprints of
God. It made possible the coexistence of sincere belief in a rational soul and a
materialistic attitude towards the mundane parts of the mind.
Nothing illustrates better the constraint that man’s view of his own cultural position in
society places on the way that he analyses nature through science. The historical
evolution of the concept of the mind mirrors man’s social development, from Plato’s
genetically-controlled meritocracy of the mind, to Gall’s picture of innate organs of
intelligence and character shining through the honesty of the shape of a man’s head.
The force is still with us. Current debates about the inheritance of intelligence, about
the use of techniques of behavioural modification, and about the genetic basis of
social behaviour show that our models of the mind are still a part of the political and
social theory by which we live.
In the remaining lectures, I shall discuss the brain as a remarkable, but physical,
organ. The brain is the instrument that has shaped our behaviour and our society; and
it is now engaged in the final task— understanding itself.

8

