REITH LECTURES 1978: Change in British Society
A.H. Halsey
Lecture 5: Between the Generations
TRANSMISSION: 8 February 1978 – Radio 4

‘What the few have today the many will demand tomorrow.’ That is Daniel Bell’s
summary of the social history of industrial society. Michael Young and Peter
Willmott have called it ‘the principle of stratified diffusion’ and turned it into a
metaphor. They picture successive ranks of families in Britain drawn up in a column
of social class, but a column on the march.
The last rank keeps its distance from the first and the distance between
them does not lessen. But, as the column advances, the last rank does
eventually reach and pass the point which the first rank passed some
time before.
With this metaphor in mind, I want to look back, for a moment, to the beginning of
the century. Here is G. M. Young remembering the coronation year of 1902, when he
was an Oxford undergraduate.
We looked forward to living, with some improvements, the sort of life
our fathers had lived. By ‘we’ I do not mean the wealthy classes, but
the sort of people who filled the public schools and the two ancient
universities, not rich, but comfortably off, who took games, books and
hospitality for granted: sons of lawyers, civil servants, MPs: young
men who might succeed to their father’s share in some old family
business, or seek an outlet for their energies in India, or the Sudan,
with Cromer for their ideal, and Milner for their example. It was an
attractive life; I think we might say the most attractive that European
civilisation had ever fashioned for itself, and the prospect of living that
life and transmitting it to our sons and daughters was an incentive, I
should judge, more powerful than any quest for wealth or power. In a
word, and it was a word often spoken in those days, England was a
very good country for gentlemen.
That was the England of G. M. Young’s youth. But, at the same time, some 200 miles
further north in the same country, Robert Roberts was growing up in urban industrial
working-class England and recalls how his elders told him
of a man with a large family struggling to keep his sick father with
them. At last, the old man insisted he should be taken to the
workhouse. They set off, the wife picking up his few belongings, and
the father on his son’s back. En route, they stopped to rest awhile on a
stone seat. ‘ft was here,’ said the old man, ‘I rested, too, carrying my
father to the workhouse.’ The son rose, took the burden on his back

1

again, and turned with his wife for home. ‘We’ll manage somehow,’
he said.
My theme, then, this week, is the relation between the generations. And my focus is
on the primordial link between them - the family. The nuclear family of parents and
dependent children is the basic ascriptive unit of society. But it is much more. It is the
reproductive social cell of class, of status and of culture. If, therefore, we examine its
history, we should see, from another angle, the continuities and changes of social
structure in Britain in the period covered by our collective memory.
Before setting out to follow the trail of biological, social and cultural reproduction let
us recognise the strange character of intellectual discussion of a subject so thoroughly
known, so commonplace, so deeply and comprehensively learnt by everyone. The
very word ‘familiar’ is used to denote what everybody knows. Can there then possibly
be anything to add? I think so: and this is because we can have recourse to
macroscopic information and to history—both necessary additions to the idiosyncratic
experience on which personal knowledge is based.
I should also remark the passion that lies between personal knowledge of and
scholarship on the family—a vast literature of ideology. The family is both eulogised
and vilified down the ages. Its immense power over the shaping of minds is constantly
rediscovered. Confucius of the Analects tells us that:
Those who, in private life, behave well towards their parents and elder
brothers, in public life seldom show disposition to resist the authority
of their superiors. And as for such men starting a revolution, no
instance of it has ever occurred.
Resentment of that power was vehemently expressed by Sir Edmund Leach in his
Reith Lectures, in 1967:
Far from being the basis of the good society, the family, with its
narrow privacy and tawdry secrets, is the source of all our discontents.
There is no lack, either, of celebrations of its beneficence. Here is Eleanor Rathbone,
in 1924:
When we are considering society from any other point of view than the
economic, we can all see well enough that, of all its institutions, the
family is, after all, the institution that matters most. It is at once
indispensable as a means to all the rest and, in a sense, an end in
itself…the strongest emotions, the most enduring motives; the
universally accessible sources of happiness are concerned with this
business of the family.
So if we retreat awhile to the calmer and more arid questions of demography, it is to
gain the light of factual perspective rather than to escape the heat of fierce
engagement. Demographers have evolved the quaint custom of comparing fertility
rates with the even quainter customs of the Hutterites—a flourishing American
community of agrarian fundamentalists in North Dakota. Demographers have chosen

2

these people because they have the highest known levels of what is termed ‘natural
fertility’, meaning that they have no deliberate birth control within marriage. On
average, their families have over ten children. Against the Hutterite yardstick, Britain
and Europe have low reproductivity. Even in the 1870s—before the onset of
widespread fertility control in Britain, we recorded little more than one-third of the
Hutterite rate. By 1931, our fertility had plunged still further, by more than half of the
1871 level in England and Wales, and slightly less than half in Scotland.
This remarkable demographic transition is not peculiar to Britain. Our history is not
specially remarkable by comparison with other European countries, except that it
might have been expected that the first industrial country would have been the first to
experience it, whereas, in fact, we came to it quite a lot later than France. And, within
Great Britain, there has been more similarity of experience between regions, apart
from Scotland, compared with the variability of countries like Germany, Belgium or
Spain.
The demographic transition in Europe had three stages. In the pre-industrial stage, a
slowly growing population was maintained by a balance of high death rates and high
birth rates. In the second stage of early industrialism, extending well into the 19th
century, fertility habits remained from the first stage, while a growing array of lifepreserving practices reduced mortality. Then, in stage three, fertility declined at a rate
which overtook the still-falling mortality rate, until a new population equilibrium was
reached by a balance of low birth rates and low death rates.
This simplified description, though it roughly fits the facts and places our period in
stage three, is useful more for the questions it raises than for those it solves. Above
all, it invites attention to changes in the place of the family in society, both causal and
consequential, that have been involved. There is, however, at least one modification to
the simple description which must be added in order to bring experience since the
Second World War into view. There was a fertility upturn after the war, followed by a
downturn in the mid-1960s which is still with us. I mention this later wobble in the
cycle to note the fact, rather than to promise that social scientists have a precise theory
to explain it.
The consequences of the Victorian population explosion are an important part of the
social heritage of 20th-century Britain. They include the growth of industrial cities at
home, and the global sweep of what I usually think of as the ‘white peril’ abroad,
colonising continents. Together, foreign domination and domestic urbanisation
created an unprecedented empire within which the reminiscences of G. M. Young in
Oxford and of the working man in Manchester combine to illustrate the comment that,
if it was an empire on which the sun never set, there were parts of its heartland on
which the sun never rose.
The birth rate, when our period opens, was still very high by today’s European, if not
by Hutterite, standards. In 1900, one- quarter of the married women were in childbirth
every year. Yet, 30 years later, that proportion was down by a half, to one in eight.
The earlier history of stage three of the industrial demographic cycle need not concern
us. One thing, however, is clear. For whatever reasons, the head of our metaphorical
queue had long since taken a decisive turn towards the ideal of the small family. And,

3

among the whys and hows of this movement, there was a fall in infant mortality,
especially among professional and middle-class families.
It may be, as Sir John Habakkuk has suggested in Population Growth and Economic
Development since 1750, that it took time before people became fully aware of the
implications of lower levels of mortality, that the middle classes did so first, and
responded by planning and reducing their fertility within marriage. Working-class
men and women followed more slowly. When infant mortality had been high, it was
both more difficult for married couples to predict the size of their surviving family
and less urgent for them to do so. And, incidentally, the luck of the draw under such
conditions resulted in wider variations of family size than are common today.
Falling fertility during the first three decades of the century may be thought of, then,
first, as an adaptation to the continuing fall of infant mortality: people wanted, and
were increasingly able, to control procreation according to their ideal size of family.
But, second, following the principle of stratified diffusion, we must notice that the
course of reproduction in the 20th century arrested the inverse relation of social class
and fertility which had been inherited by Edwardian Britain. At that time, social
distribution of the reproductive burden operated on the exact, if lunatic, principle of
the largest load on the weakest back. In the following 30 years, the working class
moved towards the earlier middle-class fertility norms. Those at the rear (or, at any
rate, towards the rear) of the historically marching column of social ranks, aspired to
catch up with those ahead of them; and this they were able to do at roughly a ten-year
distance. Class differences in fertility began slowly to be reduced: so that, in this
sense, the stratified diffusion metaphor has to be modified—the tail was closing up on
the head of the queue, the queue was beginning to reform into an advancing line
abreast.
Could this very different principle of progress be fully realised? Perhaps not, for what
I called the ‘late wobble’ in the demographic transition contained yet another change
of direction among the social leaders in the 1940s and 1950s. They changed course
towards larger families, while manual workers and their wives continued along the
old path. So we find Habakkuk, in 1968, asking:
May it not be that the middle classes, who, in the 1970s, led the
country into the fashion of small families, are now leading us back to
big families?
He doubted whether the steps would be retraced very far, and the evidence of later
years has justified his doubt: and there has been an important consequence. The
fertility of those who have married since 1965, when projected to estimate completed
family size, comes to just below 2.2 children for that statistical creature, the average
wife, which is just above the so-called ‘replacement’ figure of 2.1. The demographic
transition to a balance of low fertility and low mortality may, at last, be complete.
There is now even the possible prospect of the elimination, or even the reversal, of the
inverse relation between class and fertility which began in the middle of the 19th
century. There is, in other words, a possible future in which births are distributed
between families in roughly the same way as income: more money, more children.

4

The demographic evidence of the 20th century is that the social classes have
converged on to a small family pattern. More people have gained greater freedom.
Virtually all can now choose the timing of their parenthood. This is as important a
feature of social change as any I could mention. And it has three further implications:
the emancipation of women; the domestication of men; and the enrichment of
childhood.
The place of women in society has been transformed. In his essay on The Origin of
the Family, Private Property and the State, Engels confuses class analysis, but arrests
our attention by declaring that;
The first class antagonism which appears in history coincides with the
antagonism between men and women in monogamous marriage, and the
first class oppression with that of the female sex by the male.
No one can read the history of marriage in our own time without being struck both by
the material inequalities suffered by earlier generations of wives, and also by their
reduction in more recent decades.
The burden of childbirth is central to the story. At the mid-point of the century, R. M.
Titmuss summed it up by pointing out that, at the beginning of this century, a woman
aged 20 could expect to live 46 years longer. But approximately one-third of this life
expectancy was to be devoted to childbearing and maternal care of infants. By 1950, a
woman aged 20 could expect a further 55 years of life. Of this longer expectation,
only about seven per cent of the years to be lived would be concerned with
childbearing and maternal care.
But no less important than the virtual slavery of Edwardian working-class women at
the wheel of childbearing was the relation of women to the economy and the state. In
the earlier decades, the great majority of families depended entirely for their material
support on the father’s employment. The establishment of a new position for the
mother, independent of her link to the economy through her husband, was therefore a
prominent theme of feminist reform. Eleanor Rathbone is again an outstanding voice.
Child-rearing, she argued, should be seen as a public service as well as a private
pleasure, and the costs spread accordingly. The main thrust of working-class demand
in her day was for a ‘living wage’ for men. This she attacked as a continuation of
ancient male tyranny. Even if achieved, the ‘living wage’ was intrinsically unrelated
to family size. Women should not be regarded as dependants of the male labour
market. She went on:
A wife and children and the wherewithal to keep them are conceded to
the wage earner as though they were part of the comforts and decencies
promotive of better habits for which he may reasonably ask but if he
prefers to use the margin thus allowed him for breeding pigeons or
racing dogs, or for some other form of personal gratification, instead of
for keeping a family, that is assumed to be his affair, not the state’s or
his employer’s.
In the event, the state response was less than fulsome, and the political descendants of
Eleanor Rathbone, like Margaret Wynne or Frank Field, still vigorously point out that

5

both social security and taxation policies continue to treat families less favourably
than bachelors, spinsters and childless couples.
The state has contributed indirectly towards the liberation of women, especially
through the expansion of health services and education. But the loneliness of mothers
with young children is still well attested, and the absence of communal provision for
such women remains an unsatisfied need. More direct emancipating influences have
come from developed methods of birth control and, most important, the gradual
movement of women, including married women, into employment. The slow spread
of affluence has played its part, in combination with the invention of power
appliances, to relieve some of the drudgery of housework. Suburbanisation and
geographical mobility have provided escape for some from the matriocal matriarchies
of the urban working-class community—a point which reminds us that women’s
liberation has discriminated so far in favour of younger against older women.
The correlative history, which is rather less noticed, is that of husbands and fathers.
This, too, is a social transformation deserving its own detailed history. It would begin
with young men of the Victorian upper-middle classes moving into marriage with
prejudices mitigated at least to the point of co-operating in planned parenthood. Later,
working men returning from the First World War had to accommodate, in many
cases, to wives who had acquired a more independent outlook from having worked in
munitions factories, and from having run their homes unaided. Literacy and the
wireless pushed back horizons between the wars. Unlike previous wars., the Second
World War did not tip the demographic balance by killing many more men than
women: the reserve army of women disappeared.
Still more important, 70 years ago, working men typically lived in local
occupationally homogeneous communities, of which mining and dock work were the
classic examples. Such communities evolved essentially male public organisations—
the pub, the betting shop, the football club— organisations which loosened marriage
bonds and took resources away from women and children.
But the newer patterns of interwar industry around London and Birmingham, in the
Home Counties and the Midlands, took their toll of the older male domination—
reducing class solidarity, perhaps, and inviting more romantic love, certainly.
Particularly after the Second World War, hours of work were reduced, holidays
lengthened, home ownership became more common, children were less ever-present,
and men were drawn into a more intimate and longer spousehood than their
predecessors had ever known. ‘Privatisation’ was a key description of the affluent
worker in Luton by the 1960s. It involved a closer, more co-operative domesticity for
millions of men. Perhaps the growth of the pornographic industry and the verbal
obscenities which are hurled across football stands are each, in their way, further
correlates of the pressure on men to adopt the new familial civilities.
But the story should not be exaggerated. The journey to a ‘symmetrical’ family, with
full psychic and material equality for women, is far from completed. Nor is it the only
possible end to the journey. Looking back, we can say that the social column has
advanced and that the working-class woman is much less conspicuously relegated to
its rearguard. Yet the new freedom is by no means costless. Divorce and separation
have largely replaced death as disrupters of the early and middle years of marriage.

6

We cannot, of course, weigh the cost or gauge the misery caused by marital
breakdown now or at any point in the past. We can estimate roughly that one-sixth to
one-quarter of contemporary marriages will go through some kind of breakdown. And
we can agree with Young and Willmott that their symmetrical family, since it asks
more of its partners, exposes them also to greater strain and higher risk of failure. The
woman left to raise children alone is among the most pathetic casualties of an affluent
society.
Nonetheless, the third estate of the nuclear family, the child, has been the chief
beneficiary of the developments I have sketched. If I have to choose a single word to
identify the changes in social reproduction in this century, it would be
‘individualism’. This is the motif that has increasingly informed every aspect of childrearing, whether in the family or in the public sphere of playgroups, clubs, schools,
holiday camps, juvenile courts or borstals. The essential background, of course, is the
decline of infant mortality and the spread of the small family. Yet this move to
smaller families, though important in itself, has to be seen as the base and not the
whole edifice of a more general trend towards higher standards of upbringing. For
example, of those children born in the decade around the First World War, only onefifth grew up in owner-occupied houses, though in families with, on average, 3.4
children. Those born in the decade after the Second World War belonged to families
with, on average, 2.1 children, and well over one-third of these families were owner
occupiers.
Most children in the early years of the century grew up in the streets of industrial
cities, but there has been a more recent move to the suburbs, in council estates and
private dwellings. Working- class life is not now so much, as it once was, a kind of
dormitory annex to the workplace. The working-class family has become less closely
geared to the factory hooter. This, combined with shorter hours of work, may well
have increased the amount of attention men give to their children. On the other hand,
the gradual growth of women’s employment outside the home may have had an
opposite effect on mother-child relations.
Children now are more likely to come from middle-class families. The working class
has fallen and the middle classes have risen as suppliers of children. Moreover, even
within the working class, the chances of being born into the home of a skilled rather
than an unskilled worker, and into a smaller rather than a larger family, with rather
higher income and rather better housing, gradually improved for those born later in
the century.
With these changes in material conditions, there has been a transformation of relations
with parents, especially mothers. There has been, so to say, a Freudian revolution. For
those born, like me, in the 1920s, it was as if their mothers had read and inwardly
digested James Thurber’s book, Let Your Mind Alone. Those born after the Second
World War had mothers who, through women’s magazines and the mass media, have
absorbed some version or other of a psychoanalytic approach to children, heavily
slanted in the direction of hedonism.
But, though the crucial norms of childhood have undoubtedly risen in the lifetime of
the oldest of us, we must not forget that, throughout our period, the probabilities of
membership of a large family, of low income, poor housing, illness and death, have

7

continued to mark off the social classes from each other. Some children have
continued to grow up in traditional working-class communities in the industrial cities;
and a deprived minority among the working class is variously estimated at about halfa-million, even today. For example, though the average size of completed family
among manual workers has fallen, a description of the childhood circumstances of
those living in the Birmingham educational priority area in 1969 showed that no less
than 91 per cent came from families of three or more children.
What, then, are we to say about relations between the generations? From one point of
view, we seem to have created a children’s paradise. No age has ever been more
child-centred, or gone so far towards making death socially invisible. Yet parental
anxiety, exacerbated by marital uncertainty, is endemic. Fathers, and more especially
mothers, inhabit a world which takes away their control over, and simultaneously
insists on their responsibility for, the fate of their children. Most parents have lived
through a dramatic shift in the standards expected of them. It is not enough, as it once
was, to look after bodily health and physical security. Parents must also answer more
than ever for the mental and moral character of their Sons and daughters, despite
influences from the street, the so-called peer group, the mass media and youth culture
which they may fear but cannot escape. They are increasingly made to feel amateurs
in a difficult professional world. The old ‘us and them’ of the working-class mother is
now a more generalised division, as between the inner life of families of all classes
and the external public forces. Such circumstances, together with the appreciation of
schooling as a matter largely beyond family control, which determines the future jobs
and incomes of their children, may add up to intense frustration. Relations between
the generations in all classes are prone to anxiety and the family is hard-pressed.
Such circumstances again raise the issue of the basis of our social order. To this
question I will come directly in my final talk.

8

