REITH LECTURES 1978: Change in British Society
A.H. Halsey
Lecture 1: To Know Ourselves
TRANSMISSION: 11 January 1978 – Radio 4

Who are you? Where do you come from, and where are you going? These are old
questions, but perhaps never before so anxiously asked, or so uncertainly answered.
Each one of us knows them as personal questions but they can also be put
collectively. I want to do that in these lectures: to turn them, in other words, into
sociological questions. And I want to manage their immensity by circumscribing them
in space and time: in space, by staying, for the most part, on this island; in time, by
confining the discussion largely to the experience collectively undergone by these
who are listening now.
This will give us material enough and difference enough, to demand explanation.
Some listeners belong to the 2.5 million compatriots who are over 75, and even to the
half-million who are over 85—people who remember Queen Victoria and a world
without radio or plastics or the Labour Party. Others belong to the 15-19-year-old age
group of four million, for whom the pax Britannica is as remote as the pax Romana,
whose world is post-Suez, who never rode a tram nor wore a Sunday suit.
However, we must not infer from generational contrasts that all we need to explain is
change. Continuity is no less striking, and equally problematic. Each successive age
group, in its distinctive collective consciousness, reflects a new world. But it also
carries the past into the future. It is not only that Irishmen perennially re-fight the
Battle of the Boyne, or that the BBC annually re-enacts the Second World War.
Adherence to ancient custom is so tenacious that, at Downham Market, in Norfolk,
British Catholics in the 1970s have defied the modernising tendencies of the Vatican
by persisting in the celebration of the Tridentine Mass, which was ruthlessly
forbidden in the reign of the first Elizabeth.
Continuity is no accident. Social customs, like personal habits, economise human
effort. They store knowledge, prearrange decisions, save us the trouble of weighing
every choice afresh. In this way, the world is ordered, but, in the same way, control in
the interests of the status quo is more or less powerfully embodied in any society.
Maintenance of that control then depends on a stable environment, of which one
important element is external security. In this respect, our history is distinctive, by
contrast with the history of the European continent. Our towns and villages have
peaceable traditions over many centuries. The last battle on British soil took place at
Culloden, in 1746. Every other European country has known violent and bitter
warfare, with foreigners on its own territory. Britain has exported its bloodshed.
But, above all, continuity is a matter of social control, and this brings with it its
puzzles. For example, many have noted and praised Britain as a land of tolerance and
liberty, while, at the same time, wondering at its capacity to resist the claims of
egalitarian movements without resort to overt force.

1

How, then, are we to make sense of the complex amalgam of persistence and change?
My answers will be those of a sociologist. This you may immediately find an
imprisonment of method, especially if I add that just by living and learning, to the
point of listening to this programme, you already know practically all the sociology of
Britain that is to be known. But that is a misleading truth—a play on -the verb, ‘to
know’. Sixth-form boys and girls setting out on an A-level science course are
frequently told that they already know 95 per cent of all known physics. It is true: but
the other five per cent transform the meaning and power of knowing.
What, then, are sociological questions and answers? If I again ask my first question—
who are you?—you may reply with the title of one of Graham Greene’s
‘entertainments’, England Made Me. The sociologist would then ask: ‘How?’ Or you
might quote Sir Harry Smith’s mother, who took leave of him saying: ‘If you ever
meet your enemy, remember you are born a true Englishman.’ The sociologist would
want to ask who, apart from a traditional matriarch, advances a definition of the true
Englishman, what other definitions are available, from whom, and who knows them,
follows them, ignores or defies them.
Sociology is about social relations—relations of individuals and groups in work and
in play, war and peace, transient encounters and enduring bonds. Sociologists seek
regularity and pattern in these relations. Hence they summarise them in abstractions
as relations of production and reproduction, of kinship and affinity, of authority and
freedom, power and advantage. They assume that the social world is not a universe of
random changes and exchanges, but, on the contrary, that the successful study of
social relations will yield general rules governing their persistence and their rupture—
rules which are by no means necessarily known to the social actors themselves.
Now, I realise I have already taken us into deep water. Is there, then, you may well
ask, no free will? Are there laws of social motion, historical necessities, propelling us
towards a determined fate? Enough. Let us defer these questions and, for the moment,
contrive to imagine ourselves as visitors from some other planet, as Martian
anthropologists, possessed of a belief in science and of the intelligence to use it,
without the understanding which enables us to interpret our neighbour through the
fact of our own humanity.
What would the interplanetary visitor see? Even without human understanding, his
computer picture would reveal order rather than chaos, regularity rather than
randomness. A guarded boundary of British society would be as clear to him as the
physical coastline. He would notice that there are two ways of entering this society,
either through the wombs of mothers and the records of the registrar of births, deaths
and marriages, or from other countries overseas via the desk of the immigration
officer. Exit is similarly marked and rule-bound: birth, deaths and migrations are
governed not only by physical laws, but also by social mechanisms; there are both
legitimate and illegitimate births and deaths.
Further inspection, again unaided by any kind of human empathy, would reveal
patterns and continuities of relations inside the boundary. Our Martian would quickly
conceptualise pair-bonding in what we call marriage, scientific organisations in the
social relations of discovery, status systems in the relations of dominance and

2

submission, and so on. Without doubt, considerable inhuman sense could be made of
our society and its history.
But our own social knowledge is both less and more than Martian. Less because
human involvement makes us creatures of our time and place, hampering us with
preconceptions and prejudices, and restricting the range of our imagination. More —
and it is a crucial more—because we can turn understanding to the service of
scholarship. You might, therefore, think of the social sciences as striving
simultaneously to understand so as to interpret human activity, and also to achieve
Martian objectivity, so as to remove from it adulterating passion. This, at all events, is
the posture I want to adopt in our attempt to interpret recent generations of British
social experience.
Sociology, as I have said, is essentially a set of propositions about social relations,
about characteristic tendencies and variations in social conditions and social
consciousness. Sociological reference is thus to the role, not to the person. Even
reference to groups should be taken, normally, as statements about a structure of
relations rather than an aggregate of people. For example, if we speak of the British
working class, it is, more often than not, misleading to take this to mean a summary
label for the enumeration of men and women in manual employment in Britain at a
point in time. So the young sociologist, Cohn Crouch, is faithful to his calling when
he begins a book with a firm reminder to the reader that ‘class is treated here as an
analytical relationship rather than as an identification of empirical groups of persons’.
And he goes on to point out that, where this usage is carried to its logical conclusion,
as in the writings of Marxists like Poulantzas, human beings are seen ‘simply as the”
bearers “of structural variables ‘.
At first hearing, this may seem a weird distortion of language. Certainly, it runs risks.
It can lead to what is called the ‘over-socialised’ conception of man which, in its
crude form, portrays people as mere social puppets, so that the Britons we study in
these lectures are depicted as nothing but the expression of, say, bureaucratisation, or
class conflict, or secularisation. But the method is justified precisely to distinguish
and analyse such social forces. That is what sociology is. It does not set out to
describe and explain some total ‘human condition’. It narrows the beam to intensify
the light: the world it illuminates is far from being the whole world.
What, then, can we gain from this sociological perspective? Broadly, I hope, two
things: we shall discern the forces of continuity and change, and we shall arrive at a
clearer view of what makes for consensus and conflict in our society. As to continuity
and change, we must appreciate that the country which you and I have experienced
was made, and continues to be modified for us, by forces beyond our own
encounters—by its geology, topography, latitude and longitude, and by the activity of
our ancestors, labouring incessantly down the ages to master their environment. The
unfinished result is our cultural inheritance. Whether you see it as a ‘green and
pleasant land’ or as the cradle of ‘.dark, satanic mills’, or both, what you see and,
indeed, how you learn to see it, is rooted in a long process of human history and
cultural evolution.
Much of all this we must simply take for granted, appealing to what every mythical
schoolboy knows; for example, that the Phoenicians dug tin in the mines of Cornwall,
that Derby, given its name, must have been founded by the Danes, or that 30.8 per

3

cent of the inhabitants of Wales were Welsh-speaking in 1921. The lessons of history
are no doubt numberless, but, quite apart from sifting them out of the lessons of
historians; they do not foreclose the future.
A story about Scotland can illustrate both points. Edward Gibbon, writing in the 18th
century, noted that the Romans failed to conquer northern Scotland. ‘The native
Caledonians,’ he tells us,
preserved in the northern extremity of the island their wild
independence, for which they were not less indebted to their poverty
than to their valour. Their incursions were frequently repelled and
chastised; but their country was never subdued. The masters of the
fairest and most wealthy climates of the globe turned with contempt
from gloomy hills assailed by the winter tempest, from lakes
concealed in a blue mist, and from cold and lonely heaths, over which
the deer of the forest were chased by a troop of naked Barbarians.
If we are listening here to a faithful echo of the Roman voice, we are bound to remark
that the Romans could not have anticipated Gibbon’s Scottish contemporaries like
David Hume, or John Millar, or Adam Smith, who made their universities the leading
centres of European thought in their day; and, if we are listening to Gibbon’s amiable
prejudices, we can at least remark that he could not have anticipated North Sea oil.
In considering continuity and change, we must also start from the commonplace
generalisation that man is to be distinguished from the brutes not so much by his
desire for a better life, as by the range of his conception of what that life might be, and
the complexity of the language in which he is able to express his hope.
Our period in the 20th century can be thought of as one of unprecedented advance in
the capacity of mankind to realise dreams. Dreams have come to earth and ends are
secularised. An aerial view of the island shows the motorway and the church spire as
the ubiquitous monuments of human aspiration. But the spires point to other-worldly
vision, and were built over centuries of a passing civilisation in which the attainment
of bliss was seen to belong to the next world. The road, by contrast, seems to hold out
the promise of satisfaction on this earth, as it busily connects factory to town to
suburb to coastal resort.
So, for example, in the older world, poverty was accepted as inevitable, and morality
was addressed to the endurance of it and its relief. In the 20th century, the moral
objective has switched from endurance to protest, and from relief to abolition.
Equality is to be realised among men, not only found before God. Liberty is for the
lords of the earth, not angels in heaven.
There are, of course, those who prophesy that these dreams-come-true will shortly
turn to living nightmares. The 20th century in Britain, and throughout the so-called
first and second worlds of industrial capitalism and communism, is thought, by some
critics, to be an interlude of materialist fantasy. The earthly paradise is a miasma and
the modern secular ‘isms’ doomed to fail.

4

Continuity presupposes consensus. Change results from conflict we must, therefore,
explore the sources of consensus and conflict. How are differences between classes,
sexes, generations, and ethnic groups to be depicted, how have they been changing,
and how controlled? The answers are to be found, I think, in the relation between
means and ends. The means are social organisations and movements. The ends are the
ideals which dominate modern social thought—what I have referred to as the dreams
of the modern age. They are Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. They are, so to say,
courts of appeal before which policy and practice appear as plaintiffs or defendants in
an evolving trial of promise and performance.
As society develops, it is through various combinations of these three ideals that
scholars abstractly, and ordinary people concretely, assess the quality of that
development. And, in this complex interplay of social action and reflections upon it,
we can discern two contending traditions—the one liberal, evolutionist, and longsuffering, giving highest priority to liberty; the other socialist, revolutionary, critical,
and giving highest priority to equality. What is most clearly evident from the British
experience, in my opinion, is an unresolved problem of fraternity, or basis for social
order, beneath the clash of egalitarian and libertarian argument. This argument is
central to political debate. Fraternity, for all its relevance, is somehow left to moralists
and theologians.
There is broad agreement that society always and everywhere, though it constitutes a
powerful apparatus of survival for its members, is also a structure of inequality. But
sociologists differ as to the origin and development of inequality, and therefore draw
different conclusions as to how it persists, and to what extent it can be modified, if not
eliminated.
The sources of inequality are of two fundamental kinds. On the one hand, individuals
have interests in life. If we assume, as we must, that there is scarcity in the means
available to satisfy wants, desires, or appetites, then interests potentially imply
conflict. On the other hand, human beings are, whatever else they are, evaluating
animals: they have preferences; they distinguish between better or worse in all things,
and thus continually judge themselves and others with respect to all human attributes
and behave accordingly towards each other. It thus comes about that there are
hierarchies of virtue, taste, sexual attractiveness, occupational skill, artistic talent,
sporting prowess, and so on. Social relations reflect these as invidious comparisons,
deference and disrespect, admiration and contempt. Evaluation, given scarcity, also
implies conflict.
Sociological thought tends to divide according to the emphasis put on interest, as
distinct from evaluation, in explaining the social origins of inequality. The fact that
both interests and evaluations are created and maintained by society itself is not in
question. Nor is the fact of scarcity. The capacity of human beings to consume or
hoard is unlimited, and the thirst for honour and power may be insatiable. As Thomas
Hobbes said: ‘I put for a general inclination of all mankind, a perpetuall and restlesse
desire of Power after Power, that ceaseth only in Death.’ If this is so, then the problem
would appear to be not so much how conflict arises, but how civil society exists at all.

5

In this division of sociological thought, Marxists start from the primacy of interests,
and liberals start from the primacy of evaluations. Their accounts of social change
differ accordingly.
For Marx and his followers, both continuity and change are systematically built into
the history of all societies in the form of class struggle. The social relations of people
are fundamentally determined by their attachment to the means whereby they wrest a
living from nature—that is, the productive system of their day. The ensuing principle
of distribution is exploitation. The consequent view of British history in our time is of
class struggles against inequality. There is no fraternity, only class solidarity and such
liberty as is consistent with maintaining the dominance of a capitalist class—a
dominance which necessarily imposes unequal rewards and opportunities.
For liberals, by contrast, the maintenance of civil society, as well as its improvement,
operates through tastes, preferences and human values. Society changes through the
inventive activity of individuals seeking to satisfy their preferences. The principle of
distribution, on this view, is competition. The liberal version of our experience
emphasises the expansion of liberty through the development of free economic and
political activity. Expansion is the watchword, whether in markets, or education, or
culture. Expansion gradually assimilates every man into the material and cultural
privileges previously enjoyed by a minority. Expansion also equalises, but by granting
new opportunities, not by curtailing existing freedoms. Fraternity consists essentially
in this universal offer of new opportunity.
So we inherit two fundamentally opposed theories of history. One has set Eastern
Europe on the path to communism. The other has been tested in our own time and
country. They are both, of course, children of the same historic European convulsion,
but our immediate concern is with the West. For us, the trilogy of social aspirations
descends in popular imagination from the slogans carried across Europe by French
revolutionary soldiers after the fall of the ancien régime. But a competent Chinese
historian would pay scant attention to what he would see as the trivial tribal
boundaries of European states. He would note that these political proclamations were
to be heard in Manchester as well as in Paris in the 1790s—that is to say, in the
heartland of the economic, as distinct from the political, territory of a Western Europe
which was modernising itself in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Professor Hobsbawm, adopting an impeccably Chinese view, has graphically
described all this in his book, The Age of Revolution. The old society of hierarchy,
order, duty, and reciprocity was to be replaced by one of democratic fellowship, in a
society of free men associating together on equal terms. True that two of the three
principles—equality and freedom—could be shown, in some ways, to oppose—and,
in more ways, to limit—each other in the actual social relations of people. These
oppositions and limits have absorbed the attention of social scientists down to our
own day. We still find them ranged from the aggressive libertarianism of Milton
Friedman, through the gentler accommodations to egalitarianism of Isaiah Berlin, or
the ‘new liberty’ to which Ralf Dahrendorf devoted his Reith Lectures, on through the
argued egalitarian liberalism of John Rawis, to the radical egalitarianism of R. H.
Tawney.

6

What, again, I find relatively neglected in all this literature is the problem of
fraternity. The Marxist analysis postpones it until after the revolution. But liberal
doctrine does not admit of this evasion. Here it is, I think, that Professor Hirsch, in a
remarkable book, has posed the problem most sharply. Economic growth, of which
Britain was the leader in the first half of the 19th century, might appear to offer a way
out of the Hobbesian tragedy. And modern political promises to enlarge and spread
material abundance seem to reassert that promise. But it cannot be so. As Professor
Hirsch argues, there are social limits to growth.
We can see these limits if we follow Hirsch and distinguish two economies: one is
material goods, and the other is positional goods. Material goods, like tea or mugs,
can be expanded in their supply practically without limit. But positional goods are in
more or less fixed supply. If we have a monarchy, only one of us can be queen: only
49 per cent can enjoy superior amenities. There is a range of positional goods, such as
old masters, suburban houses, and the wardenship of Nuffield College, which are
fixed or scarce in some socially, imposed sense, or spoilt if more extensively used.
The market for them is a zero-sum game—if you win, I lose—or even a negative-sum
game, in that people consume resources in mutually cancelling efforts to gain market
advantage.
Hirsch’s thesis is, then, a restatement of the Hobbesian problem applied to the special
conditions of modern Britain, where economic liberalism, as he puts it, is ‘the victim
of its own success ‘. He argues that affluence presents a new form of the old problem
of reconciling limited means to unlimited ends. At first, full participation was
confined to a minority. But the story of Britain in the 20th century is undoubtedly one
of gradually increasing demand for full participation in the ‘good life’. And, pan
passu, it becomes increasingly clear that the economic liberalism which encourages
self-interest (or liberty) runs against the no less pressing need of a social morality of
obligation, if markets are to be free and efficient.
Here again, then, is the problem of fraternity Its origins lie in the intrinsic character of
scarcity as an essential feature of society, which also gives rise to a perennial problem
of inequality in the distribution of power and advantage. Scarcity will always bring us
back to the problem of fraternity. The characteristic and confused expression of this
problem is a familiar and widely expressed generalisation—the comprehensive
proposition that British society faces imminent disaster. The proposition is that Britain
has declined, is declining, and will shortly collapse.
Some Conservative politicians tend to describe our current conditions in terms of the
11th hour, at which we must turn back or give ourselves up to socialist tyranny. Some
Marxists hail what they term ‘contradictions’ as evidence of the end of capitalist
society and the approaching revolution. Even the Labour Party, the main bearer of
political cheerfulness in our time, has lately tended to see North Sea oil as a last
chance to modernise our economy and society. No industrial technology is without a
scientist to forecast its demise: no political party, Labour, Conservative, Liberal or
Communist, is without a political scientist to predict its break-up and the end of
parliamentary institutions.
Nor do anticipations of death stop at the economy and the state. The institutions of
reproduction, that is, the family and the school, have collected to themselves a chorus

7

of equally gloomy forecast over the past generation. And with them, according to
many intellectuals, go the foundations of authority and the maintenance of cultural
standards.
Here is Lord David Cecil’s expression of the thesis: he is looking back, in 1973, to his
grandfather’s death in 1903.
My grandfather died that evening, as the sun was setting.
This sunset, as subsequently historians have not failed to point out,
was symbolic; and not just of my grandfather’s death. To the
contemporary observer his career had remained to its close a success
story. He died still a revered national figure, with his party in power
and his policies apparently successful: he had been prime minister of
England at the Diamond Jubilee of 1897, which celebrated the highest
point of dominion and glory ever attained by the English.
Within 50 years of his death, British greatness had dwindled,
aristocratic government had disappeared, individual liberty had lost its
prestige and England had been involved in the two greatest wars in the
history of mankind.
Can all these authorities be wrong? Certainly, it would be imprudent to ignore them. I
want, therefore, to set out the main lines of argument and thus to arrive, if I can, at a
more secure base for agreeing or disagreeing with what I take to be the dominant
theme of current conventional wisdom.

8

