REITH LECTURES 1978: Change in British Society
A.H. Halsey
Lecture 6: The Social Order
TRANSMISSION: 15 February 1978 – Radio 4

It is perfectly possible that the United Kingdom of England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland will shortly disintegrate. Even to say this in 1978 may be thought
sacrilegious: and to have said it ten years ago would have to be dismissed as absurd.
But I must immediately point out that, if, for a moment, we look beyond our native
pieties and take, instead, the wider perspective of contemporary world history, the
prospect of our approaching insular disestablishment is rather commonplace.
Integration between nations, and ethnic disintegration within them, is the common
pattern of current economic and political development all over the world. We find
ourselves drawn simultaneously into the European Economic Community and into
Scottish and Welsh separatism. The very different political and economic
circumstances of the Russian empire, of China, and of Africa, reveal, on a larger scale
in each case, the same story. Enlarging economic organisation, with modernity as its
aim, combines with sharp internal conflicts between Russian and non-Russian within
the USSR, Han and non-Han minorities in China, and tribal groups in Africa. Our
own experience is not unique. Nor is conflict, despite our cultural bias against
recognising it, in any way odd. As I pointed out in my first lecture, the coexistence of
interests and scarcity makes it more difficult to explain why societies hang together,
rather than why they break up.
All the more, then, is it a puzzle that, at least since Culloden in 1746, and despite
historical rumours about 1688, 1848 and 1926, and not withstanding the southern Irish
breakaway in 1922, and the current so-called ‘troubles’ which we hesitate to name as
civil war, British history and the British state have been quite outstandingly tranquil.
Ever since the battles between the parliamentary armies and the forces of the crown,
more than 300 years ago, the outstanding fact about Britain is domestic peace.
Why? How did the nation that led the industrial revolution somehow contrive this
changelessness? How did it retain monarchic and mediaeval symbols of unity, absorb
first a bourgeoisie, and second a proletariat, turn Hadrian’s Wall and the Edward
castles into tourist attractions, and contain the eisteddfod (which, I am told, is a
mediaeval invention of the 19th century) and the kilt as quaint, atavistic, regional
colourfulness, signifying politically nothing? And why, if it is so, are these ancient
manifestations of war, bloodshed, force and oppression, so long turned into harmless
symbols of pacification and gentleness, now re-emerging as signals of separatism and
hostility? These are the questions for my final talk: the problem of fraternity which
has been latent in my discussion of liberty and equality, the problem of social order
which has underlain my chronicle of class, status and party.
One thing is obvious. Neither Marxism nor liberalism can solve our central
problem—the problem of order or, as I have put it, fraternity. Neither tradition ever
developed a serious theory of nationalism. For the Marxist, nationalism is a secondary

1

force, more or less useful in the march of history towards world revolution, given
greater or lesser emphasis, according to whether the theorist prefers Lenin or Rosa
Luxemburg. Liberal theory, too, has a central concept of one world, evolving, as
rationality displaces mercantilism and other superstitions, towards free trade,
patterned by comparative cost advantages. Both theories come out of the early
development of capitalism, both vastly overestimate the possibility of economic
solutions: the Marxists, by assuming that the economic power of the capitalist class is
all that stands in the way of a harmonious society of free and equal men, needing no
political state to organise their brotherhood; the liberals, by assuming that the free
market generates just distribution, needing only minimal government to guard its
contractual perfection.
I want to argue that there are native traditions of social and political theory which can
be of more use to us in our search for a solution. If the first enemy of social peace in
Britain is the persistence of inequality, then we can look to such writers as T. H.
Marshall who, as I suggested m my third lecture, avoids both the Marxist and the
liberal error.
Societies are made and broken by like interests leading to cohesion or competition,
and by unlike interests which bind men together or bring them into conflict. But there
is another principle of social organisation—domination—which has become
increasingly important in modern societies in the form of the authority of rationally
created rules. Authority always has two sides, force and faith: the faith of the ruled
that the rulers have the right to make rules by which people must live (for example,
that they must pay so much in taxes); and the force that the rulers have at their
disposal to compel compliance with the rules. In modern societies, by far the most
important source of authoritative rules is the state, and the definition of the state, at
once most simple and most useful, is that it has a monopoly of ultimate force in the
territory it claims. But societies are not identical with states, as the example of
Scotland clearly shows.
The integration of a society is based less on force and more on faith; that is, on
cultural affinities of language, custom, belief and history which give the members a
consciousness of kind and kin with each other and a sense of cultural boundary from
other peoples. These bonds are more enduring, so that states and empires have risen
and fallen more rapidly than have societies: a nation and people can live, politically or
militarily-speaking, underground, through many generations of foreign rule. Faith
converts force into authority and consent. At all events, force and faith, in their varied
manifestations, have played their part in what has been, historically, a remarkably
united kingdom. Some of the unifying influences are easy enough to discern. The
British state, centred on the monarch in Parliament, held undisputed sway over
England, Scotland and Wales for centuries and, more important, naval power
controlled an empire eventually covering one-quarter of the land surface of the whole
earth. Britain, in 1900, was still the greatest of imperial nations, a major workshop of
the world, and miraculously secured at the same time by a still impregnable insularity.
British society was itself the apex of a worldwide imperial dominion, and London the
financial centre of world trade.
This powerful combination of industry and empire obviously afforded huge wealth
and wide opportunity to its controllers. Wealth and opportunity were most unequally

2

shared within the society, between classes, sexes and regions. But continuing, if
decelerating and unsteady, expansion, itself a supplement to integration, was further
and massively reinforced by the custom and culture of a most peculiar island. It was a
culture of patrician liberalism. The aristocracy and the gentry maintained a dominance
over both society and state, from the overthrow of absolutist monarchy, in the 17th
century, and right through the imperial and industrial development of the next 200
years.
Liberalism, as a theory of- free markets in the service of economic growth, is older in
England than the bourgeois industrialist manufacturer. The English landowning
classes had developed it long before the industrial revolution. The aristocracy and the
gentry absorbed the bourgeoisie in the 19th century. This gave tt the 20th century a
stratified society which, though strongly resembling the Marxist description of
polarised class society if one looked at the northern industrial towns, was also a status
hierarchy of apparent agelessness. It was rooted in a mediaeval agrarian past. It
provided a governing class descended from preindustrial times to which was added,
especially in the southern counties, those whose wealth and status derived from the
empire, and from the finance capitalism of the City of London.
In short, Edwardian Britain was a country of inequality, but a strongly-knit nation. In
the course of overseas imperialism and domestic industrialisation, a legacy of feudal
aristocracy had been accepted by both bourgeoisie and proletariat. No wonder, then,
that Lord David Cecil saw the sunset over his grandfather’s deathbed as also the
twilight of British greatness, for the fusion I have briefly sketched was gradually to be
undone by its frailties at home and abroad. Abroad, the industrial competitors—
America and Germany—had already ended Britain’s primacy. In a century of relative,
though not absolute, decline, there was a period of prosperity in the 1950s and Sixties.
When that interlude ended, publicly bewailed economic stagnation, class and status
inequalities and, more recently, the recrudescence of older nationalisms were less and
less easily contained by the traditional remedies of political liberalism, gentlemanly
culture and civic incorporation.
Nevertheless, there have been strong forces making for integration. If only because
we are so accustomed now to gloomy discussion of economic decline, we should
remind ourselves that this century has been one of economic growth. The average
person is unquestionably better fed, better clothed, better housed, and enjoys a longer,
healthier and more leisured life than his Edwardian predecessor. Clearly, allegiance to
a society is more secure when these ameliorations are in train; that is, when the
generations see a darker past and a brighter future.
We also do well to remind ourselves of the integrating aspects of war. It is a paradox
of external conflict that it promotes equality and fraternity within the nation. Both
wars enlarged the horizon of expectations of ordinary men and women, and that
erodes fraternity. But the wars also brought renewed promise for the future. They
softened class divisions, reduced inequality and reinforced patriotic sentiment.
But ever ‘twixt the book and his bright eyes
The gleaming eagles of the legions came.

3

This was possible reverie for a young clerk in England in the First World War and
even the Second, before the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
The factor of paramount importance has been the essentially unprincipled inequality
of distribution of wealth and income which gives rise to anomy or normlessness. The
stubborn persistence of distributional inequality of wealth and income up to 1970
needs no further documentation. And it is true that, at least until recently, the
implications of inequality manifested themselves in the economic rather than in the
political sphere. Consensual politics have been maintained partly by the remarkably
restricted comparisons within and between classes which Runciman has analysed, and
partly by the political culture of democracy which I reviewed in my fourth lecture.
Within the economic sphere, however—in industrial relations and the management of
incomes policy—inequality has been corrosive. The manifestations have not been
those of class warfare, but, rather, as John Goldthorpe has argued, ‘in a situation of
anomy; that is . . . a lack of moral regulation over the wants and goods that individuals
hold’.
We must also take account of the fact that the development of the social rights of
citizenship generates conflict as well as consensus. The egalitarian principle intrinsic
to citizenship challenges normative approval of market inequalities. Class and
citizenship are at war in the 20th century. Citizenship also undermines traditional
status hierarchies which, though strongly rooted in British culture, are conventionally,
not legally, based. Citizenship is therefore a basis for dissent from the established
social order. And the extension of citizenship rights into the industrial sphere—a
movement towards various forms of industrial democracy—gives unions and,
especially, local groups of workers and their shop stewards increased protection and
power to pursue their market and work interests relatively undisciplined by traditional
constraints.
So the partial development of the principle of citizenship, under circumstances where
competing distributional principles deriving from class, status and citizenship still
contend for pre-eminence, may reduce rather than increase solidarity. The
consequences have been increasingly evident in the recent history of industrial
relations. They are most dramatically illustrated in the growing bitterness of race
relations in the major English cities.
Our 20th-century experience has not been one of steady secular decline. Before the
First World War, the balance of social solidarity was tipping towards disintegration,
mainly along class lines. Class polarisation and alienation from industrial work were
growing. These were inevitable features of economic development along capitalist
lines, but they were checked in that period by limited working-class expectations and
the strong alliance of aristocrat and bourgeois. Meanwhile, the old traditions of civil
liberty, in which modern citizenship is rooted, though they provided the legal basis for
the development of class inequalities, had also begun to extend into political
enfranchisement, and into a set of social rights which later came to be called the
welfare state. The organisation of the working class was also built on the same
foundations of citizenship. These integrative forces were, however, only weakly
struggling into existence. There was also, especially on Clydeside, a serious
syndicalist tide flowing away from the more moderate mainstream of the trade unions,
the Co-operative Societies, and the infant Labour Party. The war itself suspended

4

opposition, and brought a primitive form of war socialism, some reduction of wage
differentials, and steps towards the emancipation of women.
Return to ‘normalcy’, as it was then termed, shifted the balance again towards, but not
quite back to, the pre-war situation. Religion had lost some of its restraining power.
The expected boundaries of self- fulfilment were pushed back, educational horizons
began to widen, and many intellectuals were vehemently critical of bourgeois life and
values. This was the period of fellow-travelling.
Nevertheless, this weakening of cultural control never showed signs of being turned
into a threatening political movement. British radical politics centred on the Labour
Party. Bitter industrial struggles scarred the 1920s, but the rise of the Labour Party
after the First World War to replace the Liberal Party was an in. corporation in the
politics of consensus, not very different from that described in the 19th century by
Walter Bagehot. And the slump years of the early 1930s temporarily overlaid the
basic politics of belief in progress with hopelessness, fatalism and fragmentation—a
deadening and defeatist interpretation of events was universally shared: economic
depression was seen as externally imposed rather than politically soluble.
Then again, partial recovery and the Second World War eased the tensions and
renewed the national promise. Liberty, equality and fraternity all made progress
during the war and post-war years. Labour Party philosophy dominated politics, and
there were even five early post-war years of a Labour government in clear majority.
The following 13 years of Conservative government were years of full employment,
and of educational and occupational opportunity for a significant minority of the new
generation of the working class. Belief in an emergent meritocracy was developing in
this period, despite the evidence of continuing class inequality of conditions necessary
to realise it. It was a time of high net upward mobility, and of slowly burgeoning mass
affluence. The tide of political consensus flowed strongly for 20 years or more.
This tide turned yet again in the 1960s. By this time, the empire was gone.
Ideologically, all that was left was Powellite English nationalism. Economically, what
remained was the overseas-oriented financial capitalism of the City, which drained
talent and attention away from the needs of an ageing and sluggish industrial
economy. Hope and glory faded from the land. Internal tensions became more
anxiously acute with economic stagnation, quickening inflation and rising
unemployment.
Meantime, the trade unions, fostered by the further development of citizenship rights,
have become more powerfully entrenched, more able to press sectional against
national interest. As I argued in my fourth lecture, the incorporation of the Labour
leadership, both in Parliament and in the TUC, undermined the allegiance of the rank
and file, reducing the ‘govern- ability’ of those officially organised into the workingclass movement.
There were also ideological movements in these post-war years, with strongly divisive
effects. The authority of churches and chapels declined still further. Schoolteachers
and parents also became less effective conveyors of cultural values and traditional
pieties as they, too, lost confidence in their right and their ability to do so. Scandals,
from Profumo in 1963 onwards, dealt repeated blows to the British reputation for

5

incorruptible government. The Poulson revelations of widespread racketeering in the
Labour strongholds of the North-East were especially damaging to popular respect for
the authority of both the town hail and Whitehall.
There was a marked contrast between the moralistic Primitive Methodist Labour
leaders like Peter Lee, and the political bosses like Dan Smith and Andrew
Cunningham who replaced them, with their public-relations networks and their
eventual exposure and long jail sentences for criminal behaviour in public office. And
the adversary culture of students, intellectuals, journalists and media men grew more
strident in the 1960s. Then, finally, came the sudden development of serious
nationalism in Scotland, echoed by weaker but still significant separatism in Wales.
Even the detachment of Northern Ireland became a possibility.

Conclusion
What, then, is the present prospect for British society? There is no simple answer.
There are forces of both conflict and cohesion: and they are complex: and they come
from the wider world as well as from within our own society. Salvation lies neither in
European integration, nor in retreat to the more archaic native nationalisms. These are
conditions for successful solutions; they are not the solutions themselves. Nor is there
any simple economic answer, whether through North Sea oil or a return to the market.
Growth alleviates scarcity. But, at our level of economic development, it stimulates
appetite as much as it gratifies it.
Indeed, the greatest danger is precisely the offer of simple solutions to the complexity
of our very real plight. We have an economy that does not release our energies, a
polity that does not secure our trust, and a culture which does not attract our
affections. Simple solutions can only lead back to the barbarism of political tyranny,
whether from the right or the left. Either would destroy the one element of our social
heritage in which we can take pride—our long developed and tenaciously held civil
liberty. Granted all the shortcomings, it remains true that, compared with almost any
other society in history, this is the land, as Tennyson said, of old and just renown,
The land where, girt with friends or foes,
A man may speak the thing he will.
Our predicament is that the historical conditions which allowed this liberty also
permitted hugely divisive inequalities of class and status. They bequeathed us a
stratified society held together by imperial might abroad, and deference and respect
for shared religious and cultural values at home. But external empire and internal
social control have been losing their power to pacify without violence, leaving market
success, in all its weakness, to justify a still unequal society.
Our society cannot stand on such shifting foundations. To strengthen them, we need
principles and practices of social distribution which are acknowledged to be just by
the great majority. And, in a world of growing visibility of reference groups, these
principles will be seen as just only if they are just. The implication is that, in a
political democracy, the paramount principle of distribution must be equality.
Equality of opportunity is not enough. This is a halfway house we have still not
reached, but which is, in any case, along a road towards a society that could be more

6

ruthlessly stratified than the one we live in now. Nor is it enough simply to eliminate
all irrelevant discriminations of skin colour, sex, cultural background or family
upbringing. We need full equality of material conditions—equality of incomes, in the
broad sense—as the foundation of social life; full equality that is modified only by
such extra rewards to effort and capacity as can be shown to be necessary for an
efficient division of labour.
Past failures have driven some to apathy, others to belief in revolution, and still others
to denial of the possibility or even desirability of an egalitarian social order. These are
the roads to tyranny. The only other alternative, the one which has my allegiance, is
this: that we, once again, take our traditions of citizenship and democracy seriously in
their infinite richness and inspiration. They offer the basis for a new fraternity without
which neither liberty nor equality is possible. They offer, also, the political and social
vehicles of progress towards a newly-integrated society. Our experiences of industrial,
nationalist and racial conflict continually demonstrate the need for new equalities to
replace old class-restrictive liberties and status-crippled fraternities. We have still to
provide a common experience of citizenship in childhood and old age, in work and
play, and in health and sickness. We have still, in short, to develop a common culture
to replace the divided cultures of class and status.
To do these things is no easy task. Stratification is stubbornly resistant to change. The
attainment of a new and sound basis for social order requires political will of a
strength we have hitherto lacked. No one can guarantee that either the challenge will
be accepted, or the response forthcoming. But I would certainly claim that what I
suggest we need is also socially and politically possible. Its elements are in our social
traditions and on our political agenda. Adversity itself is now, sufficient to give social
response to political initiative. Democratic politics is, essentially, a system in which
citizens actively mould the final decisions binding on all. It works only if liberty of
thought and expression is ranked first among rights, and the active exercise of
citizenship first among duties. Political action is inevitably carried on by imperfect
people in public office. Hence the constant need for an alert and knowledgeable
citizenry to protect itself against oppression and to prevent the public services from
disintegrating into organisations which serve the private interests of public servants.
Bold advances towards wider citizenship—in Scotland for the Scots, in the workplace
for workers, in the school for parents, in the locality for the neighbour, and so on,
could evoke popular support. Of course, there is also opposition. There are always
those who place private interest above public welfare. Patient persuasion has to be our
principal weapon: for persuasion is democracy in action. Only if it is given constant
priority can we both guard our freedoms and override the resistance of vestedinterest. Only then, but certainly then, has democracy the right to enforce its will.
That, all too briefly, is my view of our best way into the future. We have neither a
paradise lost, nor a paradise to be regained. Yet we can, if we will, take heart from
Milton’s portrayal of the departure of our primal ancestors from the Garden of Eden:
Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon;
The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They hand in hand with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.

7

