REITH LECTURES 1978: Change in British Society
A.H. Halsey
Lecture 4: The Rise of Party
TRANSMISSION: 1 February 1978 – Radio 4

This week, I want to trace the development of deliberate organisation in relation to the
changing structure of class and status in Britain. This will lead me, in the end, to the
fact that the trade unions and the Labour Party had, eventually, to face the problem of
what Cohn Crouch calls ‘alienation of the organisational apparatus from the
membership’. This fate befalls all large organisations. They tend to become remote
from the interests they are created to serve, the more so the more successfully they
recruit members. Thus Marx’s remark that ‘history is made behind men’s backs’
applies to those who consciously seek to change that history as much as to those who
do not.
At the beginning of the century, economic organisations were dominated by a private
owning and controlling class and political organisation by the Conservative and
Liberal wings of the middle and upper classes. The Labour Party did not exist, and the
trade union movement, though it had deep roots, especially among skilled workers in
the earlier stages of industrial’ ism, was struggling to extend its organisational sway
among semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
There were two million union members at the beginning of this century, out of a total
potential membership of nearly 16 million. In other words, only one-eighth of all
possible recruits had, in fact, been recruited. Put more technically, the density of
membership was 13 per cent in 1900, and this figure rose rapidly to reach 45 per cent
by 1920. Since that date, unionisation has had fluctuating fortunes, but did not attain a
higher density than it had in 1920 until the 1970s, when, for the first time, it reached
the present 50 per cent mark.
The end of the 19th century had brought the period of peaceful bourgeois domination
to its late autumn of economic progress, imperial expansion and national security.
Political conflict divided contestants by religion more than by class. But class politics
were soon to sweep away the old divisions. The class struggles previously fought in
an autonomous economic sphere were to enter into the political sphere, forcing
governments to move from a passive ‘keeping of the ring’ into economic intervention
and management. These movements towards a kind of ‘Britain Incorporated’ were the
consequences, essentially, of developments in class structure; but the form they took,
and, particularly, the part played in them by an organised working class, was
conditioned by those developments in the status of citizenship which T. H. Marshall
has analysed: the civil right to free association out of which the trade unions were
built, and political enfranchisement which gave the Labour Party its opportunity.
These interconnected industrial and political movements were, to be sure, class and
collectivist organisations; but their character was outstandingly social democratic—
much more so than their counterparts in the continental countries. Part of the

1

explanation lies in the strong historical link between the period of religious cleavage
and that of class cleavage in British politics.
In its secular effects, organised religion is usually and properly seen as primarily an
apparatus of social control. The ‘heart of a heartless world’ as Marx acknowledged,
but also, then a striking phrase, if now a cliché, ‘the opium of the people’. In
industrial Britain, the Nonconformist chapels were also the bearers of a radicalism
which schooled more than one generation of labour activists. Even the Church of
England nurtured its socialists—men like R. H. Tawney, or Archbishop Temple,
whose conception of the social order began with the morality of the New Testament,
and who saw capitalism not simply as un Christian but anti-Christian, in that it
converted economic means into overriding ends, and thus introduced the worship of
false gods. I remember as a child in the 1930s intoning the Magnificat at Evensong in
a Northamptonshire church: ‘He hath put down the mighty from their seat and hath
exalted the humble and meek.’ And I vaguely assumed that the archaic language of
my elders had led them to essential truth but with wrong tenses, just as they appeared
also to be confused as to the geographical location of Jerusalem.
At all events, the religiously moulded inheritance of native radicalism of the early
years of this century was responsible, respectable, even conformist. It was a
radicalism that accepted many traditional and middle-class values, not a radicalism of
class warfare. It was therefore less terrifying to the dominant classes, making their
resistance to the spread of political suffrage weaker, and encouraging the political
wing of the ruling class to stay as far as possible out of the battle between capital and
labour in the workplace—a policy, in any case, enjoined by 19th-century liberal
theories of economics and politics. It gave working class leaders to the 20th-century
who, though tenaciously defensive of union interests in dealing with owners and
managers, were anti-Marxist, non-revolutionary, pragmatic and piecemeal in their
reformist intentions.
At least, until the 1960s, there has been a marked asymmetry in the class relations of
economics and politics in Britain—the one (in economics) characterised by low, and
the other (in politics) by high, relations of trust. In the workplace, the working class
accepted the definitions imposed upon it by its economic masters. Alan Fox puts it
this way:
So far as work relations were concerned, the classes existed alongside
each other, self- contained and independent; mutually alienated; the one
seeking to protect itself against the superior power of the other by means
of a process of low-trust bargaining.
Fox chooses his words carefully. He uses the phrase, ‘existed alongside ‘, rather than
‘confronted’, because working-class independence ran only along certain dimensions
of class relations. It was not an independence grounded in any generalised conception
of class war in the Marxist sense.
Indeed, it could be argued that trade unionism, collective bargaining, and
the subculture which celebrated solidarity and collectivism, was only
conceded legal status and…social acceptance by the more powerful
groups in society because working-class independence showed clear

2

signs of limiting itself to relatively marginal challenges of a bread-andbutter kind at the workplace.
Paradoxically, the General Strike of 1926, which was a moment of tense confrontation
between the two main classes, also provided unmistakable evidence of a consensual
political culture. The stories of good humour and fair play between strikers and
soldiers have since taken their place in national mythology. I am not thinking of those,
but, rather, of the exchanges in the House of Commons and in Downing Street, before
and after the event, between the Conservative prime minister, Stanley Baldwin, and
the Labour members.
The year before, two Tories (one a Conservative trade unionist) put down a private
member’s bill to end the political contribution to the Labour Party from trade union
dues. The bill would probably have succeeded, but Baldwin opposed it. After
discoursing on the growing power of the organised employers and organised workers,
and on the tradition of letting Englishmen develop their own associations in their own
way, he went on as follows:
We find ourselves, after two years in power, in possession of the greatest
majority our party ever had…because, rightly or wrongly, we succeeded
in creating the impression that we stood for stable government and for
peace in the country between all classes of the community. I want my
party today to make a gesture to the country and to say to them: we have
our majority; we believe in the justice of this bill…but we are going to
withdraw our hand; we are not going to push our political advantage
home.
Although I know that there are those who work for different ends from
most of us in this House, yet there are many in all ranks and in all parties
who will re-echo my prayer: ‘Give peace in our time, O Lord’.
Fourteen years later, David Kirkwood, described by G. M. Young as ‘once the fire
brand of Clydeside’, wrote a letter to Baldwin, remarking the change in attitudes
between 1914 and 1938. In it, he said:
It seemed to me that. .. In your speech, you made flesh the feelings of
us all: that the antagonisms, the bitterness, the class rivalry, were
unworthy, and that understanding and amity were possible.
We are listening here to two characteristic voices of British politics even after the
organised working class had become the major opposition party. Disraeliesque, one
nation Toryism and social-democratic Labour were those two voices. The hard heads
of right and left poured scorn on them then, and still do today. It is easy to dismiss
them as rhetorical sentimentalists. It is wiser, perhaps, to recognise that the creation of
universal suffrage and all the apparatus of industrial bargaining and conciliation also
entailed the creation of vested interests in them for both classes.
Alternatively, these British peculiarities have been explained by the thesis of a
deferential working class. The point of departure of the thesis is that, extension o, the
suffrage notwithstanding, a country with a hugely preponderant proletarian electorate

3

has returned more Conservative than Labour governments. Even if we start from
1918, so as to ignore the early period of restricted male franchise, the party of the
working class has held office for only 19 of the subsequent 60 years.
This comparative electoral failure cannot be explained away by denying the
proposition that Labour has been the working class party. The Communist Party has
never attracted more than a fraction of one per cent of the votes, and the decline of the
Liberals, after their split in 1916, took more Liberal voters into the Conservative than
into the Labour camp. Between the wars, the class base of the Labour Party took a
long time to establish. Consolidation came only with the Second World War, when
there was a profound national shift of political outlook which led to the Labour
landslide of 1945. Even so, the capture of the working class as a potentially
overwhelming political force was never complete. Labour electoral support levelled
off after the war, to leave the two main parties in fine balance.
The slow growth and limited success of the Labour Party as the political organisation
of the working class is therefore to be explained partly by its relatively late start,
partly by the inevitably slow process of building up loyalty as parents passed on their
party commitment to their children, and partly from the brilliant ingenuity of the
Conservative Party in rebutting the 20th-century challenge that political parties should
be seen solely in terms of class interest. It is the success of the Conservatives in
combating this one-dimensional view of politics, and the corresponding failure of
Labour to maximise its appeal to class, that accounts for British electoral history, not
the deferential working-class Tory voter. Such voters are to be found. And those
manual workers who vote Conservative are more likely to be strong supporters of the
monarchy than are their workmates who vote Labour. But before the inference is
accepted that the working class Tory vote is deferential, we must also notice that more
than half of the working- class Labour voters are royalists, and that monarchist
sentiment is more common among the Labour-voting working class than among the
Labour-voting middle class.
Of course, this is only one indicator of what writers have in mind in defining
deferential voting: but, weighing all the evidence, we are forced back to Walter
Bagehot’s judgment that the English as a nation are deferential. We have no need to
ascribe these attributes exclusively to the working class.
The incomplete but steady consolidation of party loyalties continued for over half a
century. But, during the last decade, the situation has become unstable. The apparent
electoral balance is caused primarily by the persistence of voting habits formed in
youth. Clues to future development point in a different direction among those recently
reaching voting age. A study by Phyllis Thorburn confirms earlier suggestions that, in
the 1960s, the association between class and party began to wane. It is difficult to
distinguish between generational and life-cycle effects in these matters, and important
to do so, since it is well established that party loyalty tends to increase with age. But
from a study of men in England and Wales in 1972, Miss Thor- burn confirms the
view put forward by Butler and Stokes that class polarisation began to diminish in the
1960s. She suggests, however, that the process has not been symmetrical. Labour
appears to have maintained its position as the party of the working class, while
middle-class radicalism has begun to threaten the Conservatives.

4

So the full story of the rise of party organisation along class lines in 20th- century
Britain must also comprehend the beginning of its displacement from the centre of
party politics, and perhaps even its eventual demise. In earlier lectures, I was at pains
to juxtapose two contradictory features of British economic development—the
persistence of inequality, and the growth of affluence. Affluence has unquestionably
made the stronger impact on popular political perceptions. Post-war prosperity,
continuing late into the 1960s, established expectations of annual increments of
income and welfare, with the political parties increasingly seen less as class
organisations than as competing instrumentalities—a competition, incidentally, in
which a Macmillan was at least as adept as a Gaitskell in the eyes of the ordinary
voters. And intellectual fashion supported popular opinion. There was, in the 1950s, a
confirmed confidence in Keynesian economic management. Full employment seemed
to be assured by it, and bitter memories of the slump years could be dismissed as
irrelevant relics of a banished society.
Indeed, in the pink glow of ‘Butskellism’, and the politics of the centre ground,
inequality was difficult to discern. The traditional call to uneasy conscience from the
survey traditions of Booth and Rowntree seemed to have ended with the last short
book published by Rowntree in 1951. It told us that the percentage of the working
class who were in poverty, which had been nearly one-third in 1936, was now reduced
in 1950 to less than three per cent. And the 1riumph was attributable to Keynesian full
employment. Poverty was no longer a class phenomenon. Indeed, it was widely
recognised as no phenomenon at all, and had to be rediscovered in the 1960s.
Ironically, in those years, Labour Party intellectuals, even at a time when the class
alignment of voting had gone as far as it ever did, became more than half convinced
that the social base of their party support was being eroded by embourgeoisement.
The famous study of Luton workers by a group of Cambridge dons dealt severely with
this doctrine and called, instead, for a new and determined political leadership of the
Labour Party. The Cambridge dons got no response from the Labour leaders, but,
meanwhile, the 1964 election left no one prepared further to argue the crude form of
the embourgeoisement thesis with them. In retrospect, what was most telling in
Goldthorpe and Lockwood’s study was the identification of ‘privatisation’ among the
relatively prosperous new working class, and of’ instrumentalism ‘in the workplace
among employees of all classes. Affluent workers were becoming more privatised, in
that they sought the good life more at home with their wives and families than at
work, or in the traditional male organisations of the pub and the club. And all
employees were becoming instrumental, in that they increasingly regarded unions,
politics and work as means to their private ends.
The unionisation of white-collar employees is the story of a principle treasured by the
working class—collectivism-— disseminated to other classes. In the process, the trade
unions have begun to lose their class character if not their class rhetoric. Even the
Association of First Division Civil Servants is now affiliated to the TUC.
Where embourgeoisement had taken place was not in the rank and file, but among the
political leaders of the organised working class. The social composition of the Labour
benches and cabinets had undergone a striking transformation. Between the wars, 72
per cent of Labour MPs came from rank-and-file employment, and 15 per cent were
university graduates. By 1945, only half came from the working class, and, by 1970,

5

only one-quarter, by which time the proportion of graduates had risen to more than
half.
These changes in the social antecedents of Labour leaders do not, of course,
demonstrate subversion of working-class interests. It is what men do, not where they
come from, on which that question has to be settled. What the statistics do indicate,
however, is a gradual change in the image presented to the electorate. In the case of
Labour politicians, that image is now far from proletarian, whether revolutionary or
gradualist. In a more literal sense, the television image further emphasises the
common social personalities of Labour and Conservative party leaders. Television is,
par excellence, the centre ground over which the parties squabble, and they do so
decorously, reinforcing an indistinguishable impression of alternative teams of natural
governors.
In parallel with these developments, participation in local Labour parties has become
pathetically weak. Since 1952, the individual membership of the Labour Party has
fallen continuously. It had risen to a peak of over a million by 1950; but, by 1976, it
had declined, even on official returns, to two-thirds of that figure, and may be as low
as a quarter of a million. On the basis of individual party membership per 100 party
voters, Labour is now numerically among the smallest socialist parties in Western
Europe.
What, then, has become of working-class interests, or, indeed, of any interest
officially pursued by national parties and nationally organised unions? There are two
apparently contradictory answers—national corporatism and fragmented localism.
Certainly, changes in the structure of politics, as distinct from electoral behaviour,
have been of great significance in the 1960s and 1970s. The previous conditions
before the war, of relatively weak trade unionism and high unemployment, and, after
the war, of economic growth and unambitious unionism, were essentially ones which
allowed the market to regulate industrial conflict. But the more recent conditions of
economic stagnation, inflation and strong unionism have forced the state into
elaborate intervention. Institutional segregation of industrial conflict has been
breaking down. Instead, the economy has become increasingly politicised, and
governments have sought to substitute their own regulation for that of the market.
Ironically, it is the political right that supports this new statism, and the political left
which demands free-market bargaining. The TUC leaders are increasingly caught in
the crossfire of sectional and national interest, and their Labour Party counterparts in
office are the frequently embarrassed guardians, not of working-class interest, but of
the nation.
Politically, party leaders have been forced into a curious schizophrenia. Political
decisions are increasingly diverted from the traditional rhetoric of party debate, and
the locus of politics has shifted away from Parliament to the negotiations of
government with organised economic interests. Hence the spectre is raised of an
emerging corporate state.
On the other hand, the rise of locally- based direct action groups is also a marked
feature of the past decade. They are, at least in part, a response to the alienation of
leaders from members in organisations of massive scale. In the workplace, these
forces have contributed to the increasing power of shop stewards. In consequence, the

6

capacity of the TUC to deliver agreements with Labour or Conservative chancellors
has been undermined. Control over the membership by the union leaders, who
represent them in the corporatist negotiations with government, is just as uncertain as
is that of the CBI over its 12,000 member companies and 200 trade and employers’
associations. Wages and even local plant management are determined on the local
shopfloor, and not by conversations in Westminster. This is one of the powerful
reasons why observers like Alan Fox refuse to accept the current fashionable
warnings of the imminent coming of a British corporate state.
The continuance of low-trust relations in the direct dealings of shop stewards and
plant managers is the principal manifestation of the class struggle. What Fox
describes as ‘arm’s length contractual bargaining’ is deeply ingrained: on the one
hand, it is a defence against corporatism; on the other hand, it holds little prospect for
local industrial democracy, because such a development requires managers and
employees to pursue efficiency together in something other than a zero-sum game.
Alienation from the state apparatus is an equally widespread popular experience.
‘Bureaucracy’, like ‘bourgeoisie’, serves more often as a term of abuse than as a
descriptive category. The characteristic response by the centre to peripheral unrest is
further efforts at incorporation. The various forms of community development
projects initiated and controlled from Whitehall exemplify the pattern. Central
direction is resented by local activists. The grand, national design for developing and
applying a theory of poverty through more effectively delivered and integrated local
social services degenerates into a complicated pattern of conflict between the centre
and the locality, and, within the locality, between competing interest groups.
To sum up three-quarters of a century of organisational development: we have
witnessed the massive development of working-class political and industrial
combination and a parallel response by the dominant classes through the Conservative
Party and the employers’ associations. In this sense, we have seen the rise of party;
and, between them, they have created a vast proliferation of the organs of state. We
have also seen the rise of a host of sectional interest groups about which I have said
little or nothing. As a whole, these developments amount to an organisational
revolution. But it has been no revolution in the Marxist sense. Certainly, the working
class became consciously organised, industrially and politically, in the first two
decades of the century, and, certainly, some envisaged social ends inspired by the
Russian Revolution. Fellow-travelling was fashionable in small intellectual circles,
and the Webbs thought of Russia as a new civilisation. But no serious Leninist
vanguard movement ever emerged. Class struggle was muted and fragmented.
The main consequence of the rise of the working-class party was national
incorporation of its leaders—a development as unanticipated by its pioneers as it was
intended by the liberal-minded elements of the upper and middle classes. Over the
following half-century, a new establishment was welded together and supported by
the vested interests, not only of the traditionally powerful, but also of the new men of
power who now also stood to lose by any departure into radical adventures from the
established framework of industrial bargaining and parliamentary procedure. And
these convergent interests always had popular support. Class was never the sole
dimension of life as subjectively experienced by ordinary people. It had its place in
politics, and the Labour Party came to occupy that place: but it was limited by rising

7

affluence and mobility, and by localism as well as nationalism—both entrenched
sentiments which enabled Conservatives to hang on to a vital segment of votes across
the class divide. ‘My country right or left’ was not only Orwell’s instinct in the early
days of the Second World War: it was a national disposition.
Yet organisational decay was eventually the price that had to be paid for
incorporation. The Labour leaders who set out to conquer national politics could not
have anticipated either their metropolitan success or their later provincial failure.
Local Labour parties now are even more deserted than the chapels to which they owed
so much of their early education. The mass membership is alienated and inert.
Meanwhile, after the Second World War, there was a gradual consolidation of trade
union strength under conditions of full employment. The market continued to be the
regulator of both political and industrial relations until the mid-Sixties. Since then,
economic stagnation and inflation have, together, created a new situation which we
can describe as the spread of politics into the economy. Unions have become more
militant, and have extended their organisation far beyond the industrial proletariat.
The state has become less parliamentary and more the centre of attempts to
incorporate and pacify competing economic interests—all of whom are recalcitrant
corporatists. And localised conflict is rife. The old struggles have shifted back to the
workplace and the locality where they began, and where horizons are narrowest and
objectives most sectional.
A heroic age of Universalist political controversy has ended. Freedom, the truly
precious inheritance, is preserved. Equality has been displaced by a political search
for economic growth: and the problem of fraternity is still with us.

8

