REITH LECTURES 1978: Change in British Society
A.H. Halsey
Lecture 3: The Reconstitution of Status
TRANSMISSION: 25 January 1978 – Radio 4

The 19th century, it is sometimes said, ended in 1914, and the guns of that August
opened a new era of British society. According to George Dangerfield, The Strange
Death of Liberal England occurred just before the First War, during Asquith’s Liberal
government. For Lord David Cecil, the sun set on the old order with the death of his
prime ministerial grandfather, Lord Salisbury, in 1903. A search for exact
chronological origins could occupy us endlessly in innocent debate. What matters,
and what is agreed now, from widely different ideological standpoints, is that the:
history of our century is the history of the decay of the values and the status system of
Victorian Britain.
This large sociological generalisation is essential for understanding the daily social
exchanges of a country in which the tiniest detail of manner and style was once a
symbol sufficient to place a person immediately in a national and unitary hierarchy of
prestige. The generalisation is important also for understanding the social source of
the ‘declining Britain’ thesis which recurs so frequently in the Times, and appears, for
that matter, in the New Statesman when Mr Paul Johnson writes for it. Its deeper
significance, however, is in the light it throws on the persistence of class inequality,
about which I spoke last week. I want, this week, to relate status to class.
Liberal 19th-century capitalism distributed the goods and services of an industrialised
earth through the social mechanisms of the market. Distributions were therefore the
outcome of interests. They arose from a division of labour which treated labour as a
commodity and removed responsibility from the rich and powerful for the lives of the
poor and dependent. The enlightened spokesmen of English liberal capitalism, Adam
Smith, Ricardo, Bentham and Mill, elaborated impressive theories of personal
freedom and material plenty. But the actual outcomes of the market were impossible
to justify. The dogma of laissez-faire was no defence against the evidence of the
horrors of women’s work underground, the exploitation of child labour in the mills,
and the squalor of the new industrial cities. To the men and women caught up in this
system, the ‘free market’ seemed to be a canting phrase for organised plunder. Class
polarisation and class antagonisms emerged from the very conditions of free and
equal access that established the market system in the first place. Order and control,
short of brute force, which is itself incompatible with free markets, must come from
con- sensual evaluations. A class system, therefore, can only remain free if the status
system is congruent with, or subordinate to it. If, as sociologists now agree, such a
supportive status system has been dissolving in Britain, then class must also have
been losing its legitimacy; and its persistent inequalities are less and less protected
from challenge.
This is, in fact, what has been happening, especially since the Second War. In the later
1960s and 1970s, we all have the sense that the social contract is being re negotiated

1

that all the methods which distribute and redistribute burdens and benefits—the
collective bargain, the statute, the judge’s ruling, the executive decision, the routine of
administration in central and local government, and even the give-and- take of family
life—all these arrangements for the social division of duty, wealth and welfare are in
debate, their principles and procedures in question.
To understand these present and future issues, we must return to the past and to the
theory of class and status. I will argue an important role for status. But this is not to
deny the stubborn capacity of class to survive, nor, still less, to argue inequality out of
our way. Class systems and their inequalities are intrinsically prone to persist. They
resist change in two ways. Those who do well out of them do not usually volunteer to
surrender their advantages, and they also use their powers to pass on superior
opportunities to their children. And the more this happens, the more are classes
formed. A fully developed class system is both a structure of market inequality and
also a hereditary system of recruitment, in practice if not in theory.
All this is obvious. What is not so clear is how class and status can either support or
oppose each other. Here the first thing to notice is that class power can be translated
into status power and vice versa. Either can encroach upon the other: but the
outstanding feature of Victorian development was the usurpation of status by class. In
the mid-Victorian period, ‘the upper class’ meant gentlemen or gentlewomen and was
still, basically, a hereditary caste of titled persons and their families. However, this
landed aristocracy and gentry had always absorbed new men and, in the last century,
the new rich of trade and industry were gradually drawn into it until, in the end, they
overwhelmed it. A new upper class was welded together. By 1900, the House of
Commons, previously an assembly of gentlemen, contained 250 bankers, merchants,
tradesmen, stockbrokers, company directors and the like, alongside and overlapping
with 70 lords, baronets and honourables.
The rise to high status of many families in the 19th and early 20th centuries, initially
through class mobility, is both a myth and a reality. The stereotype is the factory
owner accumulating capital in a northern or Welsh industrial town in the first
generation; the firm expands in the second generation and, in the third, is a large
public corporation, vertically integrated and with metropolitan headquarters. The
status translation of family members runs from the original artisan—provincial,
respectable, chapel-attending; the sons are educated in local grammar schools and
perhaps Armstrong College in Newcastle, or Josiah Mason in Birmingham, and the
grandsons in a major public school and an Oxford college. The family journey also
runs from chapel to church, from Liberal to Conservative voting, from business to the
major professions and management; and from the Commons to the Lords. The
Heralds College attends to the details.
This caricature indicates that, though classless societies have existed, and more are
conceivable without classes, status depends, in the long run, on access to material
resources, and such access in this case was primarily afforded through the capital and
labour markets.
If we look at Edwardian Britain, we find a secure alliance of class with status. The
bourgeoisie had adopted modified versions of the tastes and style of life of the
aristocracy and the gentry. The old barriers between church and dissent had been

2

widely breached, and trade had married title as Sybil had wedded Egremont in
Disraeli’s novel. This formidable combination dominated the manners and
consciousness, not only of its cadets in what Orwell called the ‘lower-upper-middle
class’ of home and imperial administration, and not only of the slowly growing but
still inferior ranks of the professons and the salariat, but also of its remote dependants
beyond the great divide—the men, and particularly the women, of the manual
working class.
I say remote, and the sense in which this was so is plain enough. But for some, if
already a declining number of, working- class families, relations were intimate
through generations of domestic service. Thus, while it was true of the status order
that ‘it is impossible for an Englishman to open his mouth, without making some
other Englishman despise him’, the language of U and non-U was not a simple binary
division barring the upper from the middle classes, but also was a language linking
the ‘governing class’ to their lower-class servants along a different dimension of
symbolic subordination. This direct association was already declining, but its function
of binding unequals together was still of some importance then. Along with
vocabulary and the routines of domestic management, larger conceptions of hierarchy
and place were deferentially absorbed.
Status control over time and social distance is one of the themes running through
Robert Roberts’s account of the working- class district of Salford, in which he grew
up in the first quarter of this century. ‘By 1900,’ he tells us, ‘those cherished
principles about class, order, work, thrift and self-help epitomised by Samuel Smiles,
and long taught and practised by the Victorian bourgeoisie, had moulded the minds of
even the humblest.’
The boys of Roberts’s community avidly read the Magnet and the Gem—comic
papers exalting the life and manners of public schoolboys. While they went daily to a
seedy elementary school, they vicariously adopted Greyfriars as their Alma Mater.
‘The public-school ethos, distorted into myth and sold among us weekly in penny
numbers, for good or ill, set ideals and standards.’ In Roberts’s opinion, ‘Frank
Richards, during the first quarter of the century, had more influence on the mind and
outlook of young working-class England than any other single person, not excluding
Baden-Powell.’ In the 1930s, and the 1940s too, working-class boys identified no less
enthusiastically with the public school heroes of Red Circle, the mythical public
school of the Hotspur, and with the imperial ethic in its purest form—the Wolf of
Kabul.
The adult and more subtle version of Harry Wharton, I might add, is Jeeves, created
by P. G. Wodehouse, and widely enjoyed by a mass readership. Jeeves is essentially
the servant, clearly more able than his feckless master, who, nonetheless, devotes a
lifetime of service to the preservation of traditional privilege.
The Salford proletariat was arranged in an elaborate status hierarchy, rooted, of
course, in the different market and work situations of workers with different levels of
skill, but extending to cover all men, women and children in a closed urban village of
crowded streets, sharing a common culture of bare subsistence and survival.

3

The arbiters of status in the community were women, centred on ‘a powerful inner
ring of grandmothers…’ The poverty- stricken analogue of landed possession was not
even so much what one owned by way of domestic equipment, but what one pawned.
To hock clean clothes gave higher status than dirty hearthrugs, or the pots off the
table. When neighbours quarrelled, the symbols of status were hurled back and forth
‘to prove to the world that the other party and its kindred were “low-class” or no class
at all. One waved, for instance, a “clean” rent-book (that great status symbol of the
times) in the air, knowing the indicted had fallen into arrears. Now manners and
morals were arraigned before a massed public tribunal. Purse-lipped and censorious,
the matriarchs surveyed the scene, soaking it all in, shocked by the vulgarity of it all,
unless, of course, their own family was engaged. Then later, heads together, and from
evidence submitted, they made grim readjustments on the social ladder.’ [The Classic
Slum: Saif ord life in the first quarter of the century]
Nor were the growth and grip of these virtues left to chance, or the comic book. With
a confidence now unimaginable, the Elementary School Code of 1904 delineated in
exact terms the morality to be inculcated by schoolteachers. They were to ‘implant’ in
the children ‘habits of industry, self- control, and courageous perseverance in the face
of difficulties’. The Catechism of the Anglican prayer-book, repeated millions of
times by the ancestors of these urban proletarians, was not wholly forgotten in the
new, unnatural world:
To bear no malice nor hatred in ray heart,
To keep my hands from picking and stealing…
To learn and labour truly to get mine own living,
And to do my duty in that station of life,
Unto which it shall please God to call me.
The reinforcement of class inequality by status continues to this day, but it has lost
much of its Edwardian efficacy. One cause is to be found in the transformation of the
class structure itself. Although, as we have seen, inequalities persist between classes,
the internal composition and hence the status assumptions and outlook of the classes
have drastically changed. At one end, the old upper class of the landed aristocracy has
virtually disappeared, to be replaced by a more varied collection of employers, trade
unionists, politicians, administrators and professional people, between whom social
connections have loosened, to whom recruitment from white- collar and manual
origins has greatly increased, and among whom there is less agreement and
confidence as to the symbols of social superiority.
By contrast, and of perhaps greater import, there has developed a more homogeneous
and, indeed, more hereditary working class. This is not, by any means, the expanded
and immiserated proletariat of classical Marxist prediction. Quite the opposite, It is
contracted, better off, and more collectively powerful. But it is largely recruited from
second- and third-generation people of working-class antecedents. This development
is not yet widely appreciated, but has emerged clearly from the studies of the English
and Welsh population in 1972, which have been carried out at Oxford, and from a
parallel inquiry in Scotland. An older study, led by David Glass at the London School
of Economics, looking back from 1949, depicted relatively caste-like conditions at the
top of British society.

4

In the post-war period, however, it is the working class which has to be thought of as
closed and stable in its membership, and the middle and upper classes as relatively
open to a wider range of new recruits from different class origins. Two out of every
three middle-class men today were not born into a middle-class family.
In consequence, the status claims of those with class advantages have become less
clear and less confidently uttered. Appeals to blood or family connections are now
seldom heard and, in any case, are discordant with meritocratic values. Ascription is
not easily married to achievement: yet the older supper and upper middle classes
recruited on both criteria. The resulting fusion of a class weakened its status
pretensions: and meritocracy, by definition, continually invites further recruitment
from below.
The development of a more homogeneous working class, with reduced differentials
and therefore less sharp status distinction between skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled
workers had complementary effects. In part, of course, the unheavenly host of
ennobled or honoured leaders of the proletariat served to maintain a modified form of
the older status hierarchy. There was, it is true, debate within the socially- conscious
elements of the Labour movement as to whether Ramsay MacDonald should wear
ceremonial dress (in fact, he loved it), or Walter Citrine accept a knighthood. When,
earlier, Ben Tillett was criticised for dining too often at the Ritz, he had to defend
himself with the rejoinder that ‘only the best is good enough for the working class’.
But few advocated direct rejection of upper- and middle-class styles of life. It was a
Rugby, Church of England, middle-class socialist, R. H. Tawney, who refused a
peerage in a letter to MacDonald, saying that ‘no cat ties a tin can to its own tail’.
Nevertheless, in the process, the symbols lost some of their lustre.
And, in any case, the slowly growing affluence and mobility of the working class
supplied the material base for new and less dependent status positions. Between the
wars, these came in fantasy form from Hollywood through the screens of the local
picture palaces. After the Second World War, internationalised ‘pop stars’ were
carried into every house and flat by what we now call the media. A history of football
heroes would sharply illustrate the point: it would run from Eddie Hapgood of
Arsenal and England in the 1930s, with short back-and-sides, deferential to the
manager, Mr Chapman, proud to play for his country, paid the wages of a skilled
manual worker, and leaving Wembley or Highbury to return home by bus and train;
by the 1970s, the archetypal hero had become George Best of Manchester United,
idolised by teenagers, forever flouting the authority of referees and trainers,
frequenting boutiques and nightclubs, practising widely publicised sexual
promiscuity, driving a Jaguar, and catching planes to Los Angeles.
Geographical mobility, quickened by the two wars, broke the grip of the workingclass matriarchs. The patterns of social mobility over the past generation have had still
more far-reaching effects. Men and women moving and marrying between different
occupation levels, both over the generations and also within their own working lives
or careers, have become an increasingly common feature of the British social life in
the past half-century.
The patterns are complicated. They have occurred over both long and short
occupational distances; they have often involved geographical migration; they are

5

different for men and women. The net result has been an upward movement through
the generations; pathways through education have broadened, though work- life
mobility has not, as some Marxists have argued, developed a counterbalancing
narrowness.
All this might appear, incidentally, to overturn the picture of persistent inequality that
I previously drew. But this is not so. It is perfectly possible that a high degree of
inequality of relative chances of mobility for people of different social origins should
exist alongside high and rising absolute rates of movement between classes. Where
there is an inverse correlation between class and fertility, as well as an expansion of
professional and managerial jobs, this coincidence of unequal relative chances and
high absolute chances of upward mobility can easily result.
But my point is that people carry images of social worth from their older to their
newer class positions, and this weakens any pre-existing accord on a hierarchy of
lifestyles. This is what has happened in Britain.
It has added to the problems of social control, whether by employers, managers,
policemen, tax gatherers, parents or teachers. It goes, in other words, beyond class to
the social order as a totality. The stabilising force of the status order we inherited from
the 19th century has been comprehensively dismantled. And what is perhaps more
important, attitudes of resentment to the remaining status distinctions have moved in
the opposite direction; they have been strengthened.
Social status, then, has a peculiar history. Yet we have still to explore its most
significant feature: namely, the rise of citizenship as a special form of status. At this
point we reach a crucial step in the discussion of class and status. What I am
essentially arguing is that the Marxist emphasis on class interest trivialises status by
relegating it to a subsidiary role as a more or less complicated apparatus of control
over subordinate classes. At the same time, I am also arguing that the liberal emphasis
on status, which comes in one form or another of a pluralistic theory of stratification,
constitutes the reciprocal error—it trivialises class by .denying its role in undermining
the freedoms promised by a liberal society. The ultimate implication is that both
theories lead to false doctrines of historical progress, and neither deals adequately
with the problem of social order.
There is, however, an open channel between this Scylla and Charybdis of sociological
miss-explanation. And I believe that it was charted by T. H. Marshall as long ago as
the 1940s. Marshall avoids both traps, and accurately pictures the history of conflict
in Britain over the distribution of work and reward, by postulating a developing battle
between the two great dramatis personae of our social history: class operating through
the labour and capital markets, and status operating through the political and legal
systems to define the rights of citizens.
The double thrust of Marshall’s theory goes to the heart of social change in 20thcentury Britain, and places contemporary struggles in the context of the early
development of citizenship in civil rights in the period between the revolution of 1688
and the first Reform Act of 1832. Marshall goes on to remark that the most celebrated
actor in this drama was John Wilkes, and, as he puts it. ‘although we may deplore the
absence in him of those noble and saintly qualities which we should like to find in our

6

national heroes, we cannot complain if the cause of liberty is sometimes championed
by a libertine’. Perhaps Marshall was thinking particularly of the occasion when
Wilkes was arraigned before a posse of outraged peers of the realm, one of whom
declared: ‘Wilkes, you will die on the gallows or of the pox.’ ‘That depends, my lord,’
Wilkes replied, ‘on whether I embrace your principles or your mistress.’
Then, in the 19th century, citizenship began slowly to acquire the dimension of
political enfranchisement. This conquest of politics remained incomplete down to our
own period: the enfranchisement of women was not completed until the 1918 and
1928 reforms, and dual voting was not ended finally until 1948.
The development of the social rights of citizenship belongs pre-eminently to the 20th
century. The 1834 Poor Law was the supreme monument to the sharp separation of
social rights from the status of citizenship. The break-up of the Poor Law is the
central element in the even now unfinished story of the struggle of status against class
in our lifetime. Its first milestone is to be found in the legislation of the Liberal
landslide government of 1906. No wonder that Robert Roberts, from the vantage point
of a corner shop, tells us how the new old-age pensioners—new, that is, since 1909—
when spending their allowance of 7s 6d per week for a married couple, ‘would bless
the — name of Lloyd George as if he were a saint from heaven’.
Citizenship won further victories as the century advanced, especially after the Second
World War, with the establishment of Beveridge’s social security programme based
on insurance, and the national health service based on direct taxation. By 1977, the ‘social wage’ distributed by the welfare state had become a sizeable apparatus. It was
nearly £1,500 a year for each member of the working population of the United
Kingdom. But the story remains unfinished because two principles of distribution
remain in contention. A class society uses the market as its distributive instrument. It
evolved historically under powerful impulses toward economic freedom, as Marx, as
well as the liberal theorists, well appreciated. Citizenship, on the other hand, is a
special form of status which looks to the state. The essential difference is that the
character of distribution turns on the political process and on the secondary form of
industrial citizenship which has developed in its wake. Citizenship is intrinsically
levelling. But it is not simply an assertion of equality against freedom. As Marshall
was at pains to point out, it permits sanctioned inequality; for example, in advanced
education or specialised medical need.
Citizenship, in this context, has been defined nationally. This point is fundamental. It
has been fateful for Britain in this century that the nation state was seen as the
political unit appropriate to its purpose. The emerging political organisation of the
working classes aimed, from the start, to conquer national politics. In so doing, it
necessarily took on the immense challenge of forming a national community: for
citizenship status depends for its support on fraternity. Looking at the Labour Party in
this way—as a movement aspiring to transform a hierarchical social order into a
national community—its handicaps become plain.
The movement at the beginning of the century was based on the solidarity of local
class communities. Labour markets and kinship networks were bounded by walking
distances. For the vast majority of ordinary people, national concerns were remote

7

from daily life. Only war made Britons out of a people whose social horizons were
normally enclosed by the street, the village, A or the neighbourhood.
Appeals for class solidarity before the First World War were, in any case, weak. In
peace, they dissipated themselves in day- to-day preoccupations with survival in the
close social networks of the industrial town and the agricultural village. In war, they
retreated before the siege solidarity of response to external threat. Both phenomena, of
course—parochialism and nationalism—may be interpreted as expressions of social
control by the governing class. But this, too, further emphasises the barrier to national
community which stood in the way of the Labour movement. A political organisation
committed to universal and democratic freedom had also to face the dilemma of either
persuading the powerful minority to join a new national community by giving up its
privileges, or forcing them to do so by reducing the economic freedoms they had
previously won for themselves in the establishing of free capitalism.
Class and status have, then, been in complex contention in our time, and that
contention has largely determined the application of the social principles of liberty,
equality and fraternity. Next week, I shall trace the evolution of those organisations
through which class interests and status evaluations have attempted to change British
society.

8

