REITH LECTURES 1979: The African Condition
Ali Mazrui
Lecture 3: A Clash of Cultures
TRANSMISSION: 21 November 1979 – Radio 4

Africa is still in a state of transition. In the field of scientific explanation Africans are
having to change their minds about a lot of things. What causes rain, for example? We
are beginning to be converted to the proposition that droughts are not caused by a
surplus of twin babies born in a particular year. What causes disease? Whenever I
have indigestion I am still puzzled as to whether it might not have been caused by the
evil eye of either somebody hungry or somebody greedy who caught a glimpse of my
jaws chewing away. And yet I do find relief when I turn to Alka-Seltzer. Clearly,
Africa is not the nearest in culture to the Western world, yet the continent has been
experiencing in this century perhaps the fastest pace of Westernisation anywhere in
the non- Western world. What are the causes of this paradox? What are the
implications?
To understand the full ramifications it would be useful to relate the process of
Westernisation in Africa to the different functions of culture in societies generally.
First, culture provides lenses of perception, a way of looking at reality, a world view.
In what way has the Western impact modified the African view of the world? In
assessing the relationship between culture and perception it may be worth our while
reminding ourselves of Thomas Kuhn’s study of The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions. Kuhn distinguishes between normal science, signifying the continuities
of scientific thought and scientific revolution, which comes when the whole view of
looking at reality undergoes fundamental and relatively speedy change. Copernicus
caused a revolution in how we viewed the universe. He caused a shift in what Kuhn
would call ‘paradigm’. Charles Darwin, a little nearer our day, was another scientific
revolutionary in this sense. Other scientific revolutions will, of course, include the
discoveries of figures like Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein. All these were major
shifts in scientific paradigms. They are also part of the history of the scientific
civilisation which the Western world later came to transmit to African societies.
Although Kuhn’s theory was intended almost entirely to deal with scientific
revolutions, what I want to raise here is the issue of cultural revolutions in a sense
much wider than that intended by Mao’s China in the 1960s. The Cultural Revolution
in Africa is more fundamental as the continent capitulates to the aggressive
conquering force of Western civilisation. The power of Western paradigms in Africa
has increased because of a basic alliance between Western science and Western
Christianity as transmitted in missionary schools in Africa. Religion is one way of
explaining reality; science is another way, though not necessarily incompatible. The
carriers of Christianity into Africa were also the carriers of Western secular education.
The missionaries built schools not simply to teach the Catechism and the Bible, but
also to teach mathematics, biology, and one or more European language.

1

Much more so than in colonial India or occupied Egypt the colonial powers in Africa
south of the Sahara gave the missionaries virtually a free rein outside strongly Islamic
areas. So, whereas colonised Indians and colonised Egyptians had to contend mainly
with Western secular and scientific paradigms, colonised black Africans had to
contend both with these secular paradigms, and with a highly institutionalised
Christian missionary effort at the same time. This combined Western onslaught on the
African mind, linking the sacred with the secular, allying science with religion,
created a particularly strong cultural revolution in Africa, not least because traditional
African cultures themselves did not differentiate between secular knowledge and
sacred wisdom.
The gods of African traditional religions were often gods of bravery. The God of
Christianity urged you to ‘turn the other cheek’. The gods of Africa rewarded the
warriors; the God of Christianity canonised the martyrs. In the end, the feminine
virtues of Christianity—the softer ideals of love, gentleness, tenderness, forgiveness
and patience—were invoked in Africa in a manner which made the ‘pacification’ of
Africans easier and their submission to the imperial order speedier. The harder
warrior values of Africa—courage, endurance, manhood, and even purposeful
ruthlessness—were discouraged.
We had to wait until the last third of the 20th century to witness in Africa the remasculation of Christianity, a readiness to invoke the macho values of militant
combat in defence of justice. The World Council of Churches and the All-Africa
Conference of Churches have had debates about the legitimacy of subsidising
liberation movements in Southern Africa, ostensibly as a contribution to their nonmilitary needs, though in reality it is impossible to isolate the non-military from the
military in the budgets of the movements. After undermining so drastically the
warrior tradition in Africa in the first 60 years of the 20th century some Christian
missions are now seeking an alliance with the warrior tradition in the liberation of
Southern Africa. The so-called feminine virtues of humility, forgiveness, and ‘turning
the other cheek’ are being challenged by the doctrine of ‘using the other fist’.
Christianity in Africa is undergoing the agony of change from a theology of
submission to a theology of liberation.
This brings us to the second major function of culture in society—culture as a
standard of evaluation, a criterion of right and wrong, vice and virtue, ugly and
beautiful. Attitudes to sexuality and sex relations are one illustration of what is going
on. One perennial issue in Africa is the question of polygamy. Earlier this year the
Kenyan legislature once again debated the issue of whether the marriage laws of the
country should be standardised, and whether polygamy should either be abolished or
made subject to the permission of the first wife or the prior wives. The militant
machismo of Kenyan parliamentarians was staggeringly clear in the debates in the
National Assembly.
What is clear is that the institution itself, though basically pre-Christian, has shown
remarkable resilience even in an Africa that has been greatly influenced by
Christianity. Many Africans end up having one Christian wife and more than one wife
under a different traditional arrangement. When some years ago Sierra Leone’s
ambassador to the United Kingdom married the late President Nkrumah’s former
South African girlfriend—and then defended himself by saying that his prior wife at

2

home had been married through traditional custom, the embarrassment was too great
against the limelight of the Western press. The government of Sierra Leone, although
fully aware that such things were perfectly normal in Africa, felt compelled to recall
its ambassador to the United Kingdom Since it was disapproved of by the West it was
regarded as too embarrassing in absolute terms.
Then there is the sentence of monogamy that Christianity has passed on humankind,
identifying love, perhaps too closely, with reciprocal sexual monopoly between two
individuals. The Christian distrust of sexuality in Africa included a ban by Christian
missions on certain dances in schools, dances which were regarded as too sensuous.
And there was also a ban on certain African songs which were regarded as too
suggestive.
Now there is a post-Christian world of values as well. There is the greater
liberalisation of sexual behaviour in the Western world. There is complete or almost
complete legitimation of premarital sex all over Western Europe and North America,
except for small pockets of orthodoxy and traditionalism. For many African societies
a transition to premarital sex is not necessarily post-Christian, but is partly a return to
the pre-Christian, the pre-colonial. Post- Christian sexual morals in the West include
easier divorce. For Africa that is also part of the pre-Christian picture, where marriage
was a matter of negotiation and re-negotiation, and a woman could go back to her
parents either temporarily or—in the last resort—permanently, if compatibility with
the husband was elusive.
In the West the post-Christian sexual revolution includes the easing of restrictions on
obscenity and pornography. In some African countries it is easier to find naked men
going about their daily business in the villages than to find obscene peep- shows and
naked models in commercialised sexual literature in the cities.
African countries still retain laws against homosexuality. That is one aspect of the
post Christian sexual revolution in the West which has yet to be imitated m Africa.
Africans generally enjoy more heterosexual licence than Westerners, but they enjoy
less homosexual permissiveness.
What is clear is that in morality as in law and aesthetics, Africa is in a cultural
transition profoundly influencing its standards of evaluation. Parallel standards are
competing with each other.
The third major area of function for cultures lies in motivation. Particularly important
as a cultural factor is the balance between the pursuit of individual interests and the
pursuit of collective welfare. In traditional African societies the scale was
approximately like this. You were first motivated to acquire enough for your own
basic needs and the needs of the immediate family. The second imperative was the
pursuit of conditions to satisfy the basic needs of the wider family and society. The
third imperative was the pursuit of personal advancement beyond basic needs. The
fourth was the promotion of the welfare of the extended family and wider society
beyond their collective needs.
Under the Western impact some reshuffling of the principles of behavioural
motivation took place. The pursuit of basic needs still remains primary in a

3

Westernised African. But next in importance now tends to be the pursuit of selfadvancement beyond basic needs. In other words, the basic needs of the wider clan
are beginning to be subordinated to the imperative of personal advancement first. In
economic terms this change of individual priorities has resulted in a much greater
emphasis on the profit motive. Unless restrained by dictatorial government an
increasingly large number of African entrepreneurs have climbed on the bandwagon
of capitalist behaviour.
Again two systems of values are often interacting. In this case the profit motive is in
competition with the prestige motive. The profit motive is partly borrowed from the
West in its modern guise, but the prestige motive is part of the traditional heritage of
seeking collective approval in the clan by sharing one’s bounty and displaying one’s
cattle. African capitalism, by combining the search for profit with the desire for
prestige, has combined in sharpening the acquisitive instinct alongside the urge to
consume. Whenever possible the interest in loud and expensive cars, ostentatious
dwellings, luxurious parties and entertainment has been a concurrent feature of the
drive for greater wealth in Nigeria as in Kenya, in the Ivory Coast as in Zaire.
The fourth function of culture is as a medium of communication. The European
languages are the most important cultural bequests that Africa has received from the
Western world. Once again the impact of the languages on Africa has been deeper
than it has been anywhere in formerly colonised Asia. The very identity of African
countries is partly tied up with whether they speak English, French, Portuguese or
some other imperial language. We never refer to ‘English-speaking Asia’ or to
‘French-speaking Asia’ the way we refer to ‘Anglophone Africa’ and ‘francophone
Africa’.
When they become independent the great majority of African countries south of the
Sahara chose their imperial language as the national language. They chose their
Members of Parliament from among those of their compatriots who spoke the now
national language. They similarly chose their governments from the same tiny fraction
of the population which was Westernised. Until now the first great leaders of Africa
have been disproportionately from among these Westernised and semi-Westernised
people. This includes African Marxist leaders. For an African to be sophisticated
enough to read Das Kapital he must have not merely acknowledge of a European
language, but an impressive command of that language. Even those Africans who are
first exposed to Marxism by studying in the Soviet Union find their way to the Soviet
Union initially through a Western European language. No Africans are ever admitted
to Soviet universities direct from some village compound. It is because of these
considerations that African Marxists are inevitably, and of necessity, products initially
of Western education and Western linguistic competence.
This has, in fact, taken us into the fifth function of culture in society—culture as a
basis of stratification. There is little doubt that Western culture has helped to redefine
the pecking order in African societies. Instead of classes emerging from the question,
‘Who owns what?’ class formation now responds to the question, ‘Who knows what?’
The knowledge may indeed be merely literary, but the colonial impact certainly
distorted reality, both in a Marxist materialist sense and in an African normative
sense. The very process of acquiring aspects of the imperial culture came to open the
doors first of influence, and later of affluence itself.

4

As for the role of culture in production and distribution, Western economic systems
carry with them cultural implications. Consumption patterns change in the wake of
canned fruit and a newly-assembled bicycle. New skills are transmitted through the
activities of Western transnational corporations. The creation of new types of jobs in
turn transforms the nature of individual ambition and occupational aspirations. The
urban bias in African development induces migration from the rural areas to the urban
centres, with further modifications in cultural patterns of life. Capitalism itself erodes
aspects of African traditional fellowship and collective life. The money economy has
created new ambitions of accumulation of surplus and the construction of commercial
empires. A new juju has cast its spell, mesmerising the ambitious, titillating the
greedy, spellbinding the acquisitive. The new juju is cold foreign exchange, the
availability of convertible currency as a form of international power. It is important to
say here that economic forces and processes of production are a fundamental aspect of
Africa’s assimilation, not only into the world economy, but also into Western culture.
Finally, we have the function of culture as a basis of identity. Culture helps to define
the ‘we’ and ‘they’ in given situations. The three most basic levels of identity that the
Western impact has deepened among Africans are the identity of ‘tribe’, as the
different groups compete for scarce resources in new territories created by the West;
the identity of the nation state as Africans go about calling themselves Nigerians or
Kenyans as a result of boundaries created by the colonial power; and the identity of
race, which has in part been a reaction to European chauvinism and arrogance towards
non-white people in the last few centuries.
But in addition to these three levels of identity—tribal, national and racial—it is
arguable that even the identity of an individual as a distinct personality has been
deepened by the impact of Western liberal thought with its principles of individualism
and personal accountability. It is arguable that Western forms of individualism
emerged partly out of the impact of Christianity, especially the Protestant versions of
it. Ideas of personal accountability before God, reinforced by individual choice
between good and evil, contributed to the emerging forces of individualism in Africa.
Alongside Christianity was Western liberalism, with its notions of ‘one man, one
vote’ and its emphasis on the right to privacy and personal choice in matters ranging
from the ballot to the boudoir. The migration from the countryside to the cities was
also in part a transition from the constraints of collective village life to the relative
permissiveness of urban life. The pursuit of personal profit has escalated in African
economic systems, and this again is both a reflection and a reinforcement of the
growing trend towards individualism.
Many aspects of life are changed as a result. To marry primarily for love rather than
for the collective welfare of the family or clan is itself a case of individualism in
matters of marriage. Monogamy is a slogan of ‘one man, one wife ‘—echoing the
electoral cry of ‘one man, one vote’. Another force which has generated individualism
consists of the rules of Western education and science. To get help in writing your
essay at school could be a case of cheating; certainly copying from your friend in an
examination is a great violation of the code of honour. One is judged in an
examination as an individual. Scientific discoveries are carefully attributed to
individuals like Darwin, Einstein, and smaller fry. Then there are the rules of Western
art. Plagiarism can be a serious intellectual and artistic sin. Yet in Africa the oral

5

tradition is still collective wisdom. Oral literature is often a literature without
authors—ballads and folk tales recited down the generations without specific
attribution as to who first composed or invented them. Tunes from drums, flutes and
xylophones cannot be traced to individual great composers of the past.
What emerges from all this is that the African has discovered himself as an individual,
as a black man, as a citizen of a particular modern African country, and indeed as a
resident within the African continent, partly because of his historical interaction with
Western culture.
What I have been considering is the cultural penetration of the West into the souls of
African people. It is intriguing now to see how the reverse is happening as the West
gradually feels the cultural impact of the Third World. In fact, partly intrigued by the
phenomenon of a Korean defiantly acting as a missionary in the heartland of the
Western world, I have attempted to follow the activities of the Reverend Sun Myung
Moon of the Unification Church. Many American parents are incensed that their
children have flocked to this movement. I can understand the feelings of parents who
regard a religious leader as a rival. I am sure I would be similarly jealous of a
religious leader who threatened my own rights as a parent in terms of the loyalty and
fidelity of my children. I have three sons of my own. I happen to be an African, and I
know that my sons would be similarly exposed to the blandishments of missionaries
had I still been living in Africa. The only difference in Africa is that the missionaries
would have been Western—belonging to such established denominations as
Methodism and Catholicism. Is missionary activity in America by the Unification
Church any different from missionary activity in Africa by Catholic, Methodist or
Anglican Churches? Is the rigid discipline imposed by Reverend Moon any different
from the rigid discipline imposed on African children by Christian disciplinarians in
the villages of Zaire or Upper Volta?
In fact, as an African, I cannot help admiring Koreans for giving Americans a taste of
their own medicine. I believe in counter-penetrating the citadels of power in the West.
Economically, this is done when OPEC buys shares in major Western industries.
Intellectually, this is partly achieved when teachers from the Third World begin to
influence young Westerners in the same way Western teachers have for so long
sought to mould the minds of young Africans and Asians. Religiously, counterpenetration is partly achieved when missionaries from Asia and Africa begin to
preach and proselytise in Western countries. Reverend Moon, with all his faults, may
be part of the vanguard.
The struggle against Western religious subculture and supremacy is likely to be slow.
But interdependence is not merely an economic condition; it has also to become a
cultural relationship. The Western world has to experience a shift in its ways of
looking at reality, a shift in the direction of cultural humility, a readiness to be
influenced by others and a willingness to help construct a new and more balanced
international cultural order.

6

