REITH LECTURES 1979: The African Condition
Ali Mazrui
Lecture 2: The Cross of Humiliation
TRANSMISSION: 14 November 1979 – Radio 4

Surely the most exasperating humiliation of all is when you are not sure whether you
are, in fact, being humiliated. If I pass through customs in Europe and I’m stopped
when none of the white passengers is, can I be sure that this is simply the luck of the
draw on that particular day? Or was the customs man influenced in his choice by the
fact that I was not white? I am prepared to concede that very often in such situations
race is not a relevant factor. But I bitterly resent having to wonder whether the one per
cent charge of racial prejudice was in fact there. It is not necessarily the fault of the
customs officer; it is the product of the history of my people.
I have often wondered whether a Jew, when singled out by customs officers at
Heathrow Airport for a search, ever suffers the same nagging doubt as to why he was
chosen. If a Jew does not, it is one more illustration of the basic paradox I want to
consider in this lecture—that Africans are not necessarily the most brutalised of
peoples, but they are almost certainly the most humiliated in modern history. My own
modest moments of doubt about my dignity as a human being have deep historical
roots, going back to the slave trade and beyond. The blacks remain the worst victims
of contempt; though not necessarily the worst casualties of brutality.
In this instance I am using brutalisation in the sense of massive physical victimisation.
I am not of course saying that Africans have not been physically victimised, but have
only been socially and psychologically humiliated. What I am saying is that, in terms
of sheer physical suffering, there are other candidates for the title of ultimate
martyrdom. The Jews, for example.
Africans had been hunted once in order to be sold into slavery. The slave trade
dehumanised its victims but it did not devalue them. On the contrary, a commercial
price was put on each victim. The men and women lost their human dignity but they
acquired a market value. The Jews, on the other hand, were hunted down by the Nazis
in order to be murdered. In that sense they were not only dehumanised; they were also
totally devalued.
The blacks exported to the Americas were destined to help build a new civilisation;
the Jews destroyed under the Nazis were condemned as imperfections of the old
civilisation. Men, women and children died in those ghastly monuments of European
racism at its most brutal. And blacks were not the victims of that ultimate excess in
racism. In short, suffering defined in terms of physical victimisation is not unique to
the black experience, and has indeed found its worst manifestation outside the black
world.
But brutality is one thing; humiliation is another. Humiliation takes the form of social
and psychological degradation. It can sometimes take the form of being equated with

1

goods and chattels — retaining value indeed, but like the value of pigs on a farm, or
cattle on a ranch.
I want to talk about three interrelated systems of humiliation: the slave trade;
European colonisation of Africa; and continuing racial discrimination wherever black
people live with white people. As far as slavery is concerned, the question arises as to
why it was Africa that was raided for slaves instead of other parts of the world. Why
was it, for example, that in the Americas the white man didn’t use more
systematically the local defeated Indian populations as slave labour instead of
importing blacks from thousands of miles away? In reality, there were efforts to use
Indians as slave labour, especially in Spanish America, but they were largely
unsuccessful.
But why pick on black Africans? Why didn’t the Europeans raid North Africa for
Arab and Berber slaves, or go all the way to India? One reason was simply
geographical. The slaves were needed for the Caribbean or North or South America,
and West Africa was much nearer than the Indian subcontinent.
Then there was the racial distance between the white slavers and the black slaves. The
very terminology that Europeans use to refer to their complexion as white and to that
of Africans as black emphasised the extremities of the spectrum of pigmentation, the
polar opposites of colour and race. It was easier for the Europeans therefore to
dehumanise those who were farthest from them in culture and complexion—and
proceed to enslave them. Africans were also easier to capture simply because of their
military weakness. Their combat culture of spears and bows and arrows was no match
for firearms.
In the earlier phases of the development of capitalism, slavery was an asset. But in the
late 18th and certainly in the course of the 19th century, capitalism was actually
becoming hostile to slavery. The leading abolitionists were the leading capitalist
powers, Britain among them. And in the United States the North was more developed
in capitalist terms than the Southern states. It was the North that was abolitionist and
the South which defended the slave system.
Why was advance capitalism so hostile to slavery and ready to save Africa from its
continuation?
The more advanced capitalism had reached a stage where slave labour was
less efficient than wage labour. A slave was often bought for life, whereas a wage
worker was often hired for a week. An ailing worker could be fired and replaced at
next to no cost; whereas the worst time to sell a slave is when he is ailing.
Owning slaves included some responsibility for non-productive members of the
slave’s family, including little children and very old people. But workers could be
hired at a minimum salary with little consideration of whether that was enough to
keep the worker’s family alive.
Then there was the pace of urbanisation in the metropolitan countries themselves and
the large pool of cheap labour which was created as a result. One did not have to
brave the seas or the diseases of West Africa to get cheap labour. It was available not
far from Manchester or Philadelphia.

2

But at the same time as she was becoming the leading abolitionist nation in history
Britain was also building the biggest empire in history. British capitalism was by the
19th century hostile to slavery, but it was simultaneously becoming much more
favourable to imperialism. In Africa, the British flag was flying before long from the
Niger delta in the west to the source of the Nile in East Africa—and from Cairo in the
north to the Cape of Good Hope in the south. Another form of humiliation—
colonialism—was under way.
European imperial ambitions were of course varied. There was interest in new sources
of raw materials; new potential markets for European goods, new outlets for European
surplus population, regardless of the crisis of habitability in parts of Africa; new
outlets for European capital to be invested in risky but excitingly challenging
ventures; new potential sources of energy with all those waterfalls and subsequently
with all that coal, uranium and oil; new souls to convert to Christianity— in short,
new worlds to conquer.
The third form of humiliation is racism. Some years ago, when I was still teaching in
Uganda, I was invited to lecture at the University of Cape Town in South Africa. I
was then, and continue to be today, in favour of efforts made by African states to
isolate South Africa diplomatically. The question which arose then was whether my
visit to South Africa was to be regarded as a violation of the political boycott of that
country, or simply as a contribution to the intellectual enlightenment of that racist
society. Before making up my mind for certain whether to go I knew what my
minimum conditions must be.
First, that I should be able to address racially-mixed audiences; secondly, that I should
be free to say whatever I wanted; thirdly, that I should be free to take my, wife with
me. Now, I chose that last condition in order to test the South African system at its
most sensitive. The one condition which seemed impossible to meet was precisely the
one which, in most other civilised societies, would be regarded as a matter of course.
The University of Cape Town had consulted its lawyers, and had been told
categorically that it was out of the question for me to go with my English wife to
South Africa without risking proceedings under the Immorality Laws and laws against
miscegenation.
I related this incident in a lecture in London some years later. My topic was academic
freedom in Africa. I argued that there were occasions when academic freedom in a
particular society suffered because other freedoms did not exist. The freedom to mate
across a racial line was, at first glance, unrelated to academic life. And yet the
academic freedom of the University of Cape Town was compromised because the
society as a whole had laws against mixed mating and mixed marriages.
My lecture was later published and, as a result, I received a letter from the Office of
the Prime Minister of South Africa, stating that the laws in question did not apply to
me. Subsequently, the Vice- Chancellor of the University was publicly reprimanded
for misinforming a foreign scholar. In reality, the apparent attempt by the then Prime
Minister, Mr Vorster, to assure me that the laws against mixed mating did not apply to
me was presumably part of the strategy at the time to facilitate greater interaction
between South Africans and Africans from elsewhere in the continent.

3

It was also a measure of the beginnings of liberalisation in the interracial laws. Since
then, South Africa has moved closer to abolishing its anti-miscegenation laws.
But does this mean that the racial system in South Africa is softening up? If so, why?
Part of the change relates to the wider world of capitalism. I mentioned earlier that
Western industrial capitalism had, by the 19th century, become hostile to slavery, but
at the same time it had become congenial to imperialism and colonisation.
Now, the system in South Africa is an amalgam of slavery and colonisation.
Apartheid shares with slavery the assumption of hereditary caste roles, status-based
partly on descent and partly on ascriptive rules of master and servant. Just as racism
and contempt for black people were at the core of the slave trade, so once again are
racism and contempt for black people at the core of apartheid.
But South Africa is also a case of settler colonialism as well as being a link in the
wider economic imperialism of the West. We might therefore infer that apartheid, as
slavery, is something which the Western powers would genuinely detest—just as they
detested the transatlantic slave trade in the 19th century. But apartheid, as
imperialism, is something which Western powers identify with—just as they
identified with empire-building in the 19th century.
The question today is whether the West can effectively work for the end of apartheid
as a racial system without losing the economic benefits of white-dominated South
Africa as an imperial system.
What are the Western powers to do in the face of this dilemma? They once managed
to have their abolitionist cake and eat it too. Can they now continue to eat the fruit of
white-dominated South Africa and at the same time disgorge the accompanying
poison of apartheid?
So far, there have been two dominant views of the role of Western investment in
South Africa. One is to the effect that Western investment helps to liberalise the
régime and makes effective social transformation easier to attain. The other is that
such investment consolidates the racist system.
The view that Western investment is liberalising rests partly on the West’s own
historical precedent. Increasing industrialisation in England gradually resulted in
greater internal democratisation. There was a growth of the urban proletariat, a
struggle for the rights of collective bargaining, an expansion of the franchise, first to
the middle classes and then to the working classes, the emergence of new political
parties, and the institutionalisation of the open society in the wake of the Industrial
Revolution. If Western investment in South Africa has the same industrialising
impact, should we not also expect it to have the same democratising effect?
A related line of reasoning is that the Western presence in South Africa, and the
consciousness of the Western model, could stimulate a demonstration effect on South
African society. The example of wages being raised in Western firms within the
purview of South African society would gradually help to change the standards of that
society upwards.

4

Again, there is the belief that Western influence on the government in Pretoria can
only be as great as the West’s economic importance to Pretoria. Any dismantling of
Western investment structures in South Africa would severely undermine any
liberalising influence that the West might have over the régime in power.
The opposing school of thought argues that with Western investment apartheid gets
the de facto support of the immense economic power of international capitalism at
large, and this in turn helps to give greater legitimacy to the racial system. Moreover,
Western nations acquire a vested interest in the survival of the present régime. Some
even believe that apartheid with stability is better than black majority rule at the risk
of chaos.
Thirdly, Western investment, to the extent to which it increases South Africa’s
prosperity, enhances the vested interest of local whites in the system as it now stands,
and discourages pressure for liberal reform. Western investment also increases the
régime’s capacity to co-opt a minority of Africans into relatively privileged positions
and distribute enough benefits to the wider population to delay a radicalisation of the
masses.
Finally, Western investment, by needing stability, helps to encourage the régime to
maintain its structure of repression as a method of assuring that stability.
Where do I stand? I agree that Western investment has helped to consolidate the
régime, but I also agree that Western investment may indeed liberalise the system. I
go farther and argue that the two processes together will, in time, create a
revolutionary situation in South Africa. Revolutions in history have tended to occur
not when people are at their lowest, but precisely when matters are beginning to
improve. Revolutionary situations often occur when progress is being made, but not
fast enough to overtake expectations.
This theory is partly neo-Marxist, though I am not myself a Marxist. My proposition
is that making South Africa’s economic system more modern helps to increase its
incompatibility with racism, and therefore helps to dig the grave of apartheid itself.
The economic substructure is thus able to change more rapidly than the racial
superstructure. Just as capitalism developed earlier to such a level that it could no
longer tolerate slavery, so capitalism in South Africa is bound, quite shortly, to
develop to a level where it can no longer tolerate institutionalised segregation. I am
not necessarily against the withdrawal from South Africa of Western investment. I am
simply insisting that we should distinguish between expressive policies and
instrumental policies.
Expressive policies seek to declare a moral or political position, regardless of whether
the declaration affects the situation. Instrumental policies seek either to induce change
or to prevent it. If to boycott South Africa is to express a moral position, it does not
really matter whether the boycott causes change or not. There are times when we
simply have to stand up and be counted—regardless of the consequences. From the
days when I was an undergraduate, I have meticulously avoided buying anything
South African. But I have never thought my own little act would bring apartheid
crumbling to the ground. Mine has been a boycott designed to express a moral
position rather than to induce change. But if we are judging Western investment in

5

instrumental, rather than expressive, terms then we have to estimate its precise
consequences before we decide whether or not it should be withdrawn.
Instrumentally, Western investment will help create conditions for a revolutionary
situation in South Africa before the end of the century.
Let me now summarise the argument. By increasing the prosperity of South Africa
Western investment is contributing to the growth of the first really large and
significant black proletarian class in Africa. By the demonstration effect of their own
firms and waves Western investors raise the expectations of workers elsewhere in
South Africa, and contribute towards the growth of militant economic consciousness.
By putting pressure on the South African régime to make liberal concessions, and
increase the liberties of its citizens, Western governments and investors help the
opponents of the régime in South Africa to know one another and organise better for
additional pressures in the future. But, ultimately, the white-dominated régime will
not give up power simply through the liberalising process. They will never reach a
stage when they would peacefully accept, for example, the principle of one man, one
vote.
It follows, therefore, that the ultimate solution is a violent revolution in South Africa.
And my own conviction is that conditions of violent revolution in a racially
segregated society can best be created when new economic classes drawn from the
oppressed are demanding new rewards, and there is sufficient freedom in the society
to enable revolutionaries to recruit and organise for the final confrontation with the
system of injustice. The concept of race will not vanish after South Africa is liberated.
Race as a concept of biological differentiation is a permanent fact of life; but racism
as a concept of social gradation is a finite historical phenomenon, whose end may be
in sight, though not necessarily in our own lifetime.
Why am I so confident that this might well be the last century with any significant
racial problems? In order to answer that, let me distinguish between two forms of
human solidarity. One kind is based on a biological relationship among the members
of the group. The relationship may amount to an extended family, or a clan, or a
tribe—or, indeed, a race. The biological relationship could be real, in the sense that
the group is descended from some joint ancestors, or it could be presumed by the
members of the group. The second kind of solidarity is based on an economic
relationship, again real or presumed. The clearest case of this kind of solidarity comes
out of class consciousness. The workers who feel united because they see themselves
in a shared economic predicament, or employers drawn together out of a sense of
shared economic survival, are part of the phenomenon of economic solidarity.
The history of the world so far suggests a decline in the power of biological solidarity,
and a rise in the influence of economic forms of unity. Thus, such biological
foundations of unity as the broad, extended family as the clan and the tribe, have
certainly either declined drastically in the Northern Hemisphere or are strongly on the
defensive.
The question now is whether the fate of these other forms of biological solidarity will
so befall racism and race consciousness as the last political bulwarks of the
mythology of kith and kin.

6

My own conviction is that racism will go the way of tribalism—and gradually make
its exit from human experience, except on a very modest scale.
In Europe, tribalism was almost the first to go among these forms of biological
alignment. Racism may well be the last to go. In Africa, on the other hand, racism is
likely to end first, following the liberation of Southern Africa. But tribalism may last
much longer; though, ultimately, also doomed to extinction in the generation which
will follow.
The consensus now emerging within the world system on issues of race is sometimes
merely rhetorical, but nevertheless part of the reality of the contemporary world. In
future, people will quarrel over incomes, jobs and commodities. They will quarrel less
and less over race and tribe.

7

