REITH LECTURES 1979: The African Condition
Ali Mazrui
Lecture 5: Patterns of Identity
TRANSMISSION: 5 December 1979 – Radio 4

In this talk I want to say something about five of the different cleavages afflicting
Africa: religion, ethnicity, ideology, nationality and class. The weakest of these for
the time being is class. A Kikuyu peasant is probably Kikuyu first and a peasant
second. In a confrontation between Kalenjin peasants on one side and the Kikuyu petit
bourgeoisie on the other, the chances are that the Kikuyu peasant will side with his
fellow Kikuyu, regardless of class, rather than with his fellow peasants, regardless of
ethnic affinity. The distinguished Kenyan dissident, Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, wrote a
book called Not Yet Uhuru - ‘not yet freedom’. He belonged to the school of thought
which saw the Kenyatta régime as a case of continuing dependency. He tried to lead a
movement based on class consciousness, and dedicated towards basic land reform and
social transformation. He expected the peasants and workers of Kenya to rally behind
his Kenya People’s Party. But when he turned around to look, his only followers were
fellow Luo, of almost all classes. A movement designed to be truly proletarian
suddenly discovered that it was naked and its ethnic organ was showing! Oginga
Odinga’s message was before its time. He thought he could mobilise classconsciousness in defence of social and political transformation. He discovered that
people were still members of ‘tribes’ first and members of social classes only
secondarily. For the time being, religion, ethnicity, ideology and the new state system
have played a more decisive role than class in Africa’s history. Let’s look at these
forces more closely.
Africa’s record on the religious front has so far been relatively impressive. After all, it
wasn’t until 1960 that the United States could sufficiently divorce politics from
religion to elect its first Roman Catholic President, John Kennedy. Yet in 1960
Senegal became independent with Leopold Senghor as the Roman Catholic President
in an overwhelmingly Muslim country. The American electorate was not sure whether
to trust a fellow Christian from another denomination, and remains unsure today
whether it would ever elect a practising Jew for President in this century. Yet the
electorate of Senegal convincingly put its trust in Leopold Senghor in spite of the
greater religious divide between Islam and Catholicism. Tanzania, for that matter, has
more Muslims than Christians. Yet President Nyerere has continued to enjoy a
decisive and convincing level of support from his compatriots across the religious
divide. Julius Nyerere, like Leopold Senghor, is a Roman Catholic. The real reason
for African ecumenicalism is simply the capacity of African traditional religions to
tolerate and accommodate alternative religious cultures. I am not saying that there has
been no religious tension and even serious strife in Africa. What I am saying is that
what appears to be religious strife is at times a reflection of other forms of conflict.
For example, in 1977, Archbishop Luwum of the Anglican Church of Uganda was
apparently murdered on Amin’s orders. Most of the world immediately concluded that
he was killed because he was an Anglican bishop. But was it not equally possible that
he was murdered because he was an Acholi? Idi Amin had periodically turned against

1

the Acholi with ferocious genocidal sadism ever since he captured power in 1971.
This was partly because the Acholi had been the largest single group in the army of
Milton Obote, the man Amin overthrew, and partly because the Acholi had a
reputation as strong warriors and dangerous adversaries. By the time the Archbishop
was murdered he was one of the two or three most prominent Acholis still visible on
the national scene in Uganda. Indeed, Archbishop Luwum was murdered alongside
another prominent Acholi, Lt-Col Oryema, who was then a Minister in Amin’s
government. The question persists: was the murder of the Archbishop sectarian or
ethnic? It certainly was not as purely a case of religious victimisation as the world
press preferred to portray it. Ethnicity is a more serious line of cleavage in black
Africa than religion. Africans are far more likely to kill one another because they
belong to different ethnic groups than because they belong to different religions.
Political parties in Africa are more likely to respond to ethnic and regional symbols
than to ideological slogans as such. But is ideology now assuming a new importance
in African politics? The most important ideological developments of the 1970s in
Africa have been the emergence of Marxist regimes in former Portuguese Africa and
Ethiopia, on the one hand, and the partial revival of political liberalism in western
Africa, on the other. Karl Marx himself expected socialist revolutions to take place in
the more advanced of the capitalist countries. The irony of Marxism in Africa in the
1970s is that it was embraced by Ethiopia, a country just beginning to emerge from
archaic feudalism, and by the former colonies of Portugal, which was itself the most
backward of all the European powers that had ruled Africa. By contrast, Britain was at
the time of colonialism the most advanced of the European powers c’)ntrolling Africa.
And yet for the time being not a single country previously ruled by Britain in Africa
has gone Marxist. In the 1970s the most radical of the black African states formerly
ruled by Britain was thought to be Nyerere’s Tanzania. Yet African Marxists would
regard Nyerere’s policies of ujamaa—socialism based on African concepts of
familyhood—as either a sham or a case of false consciousness. Many of Tanzania’s
own radicals on the campus of the University of Dar es Salaam would at best regard
Nyerere’s work as a mildly progressive effort and Nyerere as at best a relatively
progressive bourgeois. In the 1980s it is conceivable that the ideological pattern in
Africa will change. One or two former British colonies may indeed be tempted to go
Marxist. Some people expect Zimbabwe to go Marxist if the Patriotic Front prevails.
That is by no means certain, but in principle it is at least one scenario. What is clear so
far is that the impact of Britain hasn’t led the former colonies to embrace Marxism on
the rebound. On the contrary, there are signs of some partial if fitful revival of liberal
democratic thinking in former British West African countries. Britain first bequeathed
the Westminster model to her former colonies, and then witnessed its collapse in one
African country after another. The liberal democratic model of more than one party in
competition with one another, civil liberties in terms of freedom of expression and
organisation, and an independent judiciary, fell victim to two African trends in the
1960s: first, the attraction of centralised government and the one-party system; and,
secondly, the intervention of the military in politics. Certainly the one-party state was
widely eulogised, and regarded as Africa’s distinctive approach to democracy. But
since then disenchantment with military rule has led to renewed interest in the open
society and pluralism in the context of a multiparty system. The people of Ghana and
Nigeria seem keen to return to liberal democracy and civilian rule. The old songs of a
one party system are no longer as popular. It remains to be seen whether the soldiers

2

of those countries will genuinely permit the process of re-democratisation to take
place.
Winds of liberal democratic change are also blowing through parts of former French
Africa. When I talked earlier this year to President Leopold Senghor of Senegal he
told me with some pride about the restoration of interparty competition in his country.
He discussed the new freedoms for newspapers, and the ease with which additional
newspapers could be established, provided they were not subsidised from abroad. He
assured me of the independence of the Supreme Court, estimating that in some
periods the Supreme Court has rejected an average of six out of every ten decisions
that have come before it from the lower courts. Many of these findings of the
Supreme Court are contrary to the wishes of the government In Senegal I also
interviewed a number of Opposition leaders, including those whose parties are not
recognised by the constitution. These leaders criticised the system strongly. There is
no doubt that Senegal is not yet a truly open society; but it is significantly more open
than most of its neighbours. The very fact that the Opposition leaders spoke so bitterly
and so strongly to a stranger, denouncing their own President, was itself some
indication that the system was not as repressive as the average régime in Africa.
It seems clear that most distinctive trends ideologically in West Africa in the 1970s
have included a liberal revival, while the most important ideological shift in Southern
Africa has been the emergence of Mozambique and Angola as Marxist states. In the
Horn of Africa, both Ethiopia and the Somali Republic have maintained their relative
radicalism, though their foreign policies and choice of external allies have fluctuated.
In Zambia, President Kaunda is groping for a new ideology which transcends
nationalism. Kaunda calls it ‘humanism’. It is difficult to be sure how socialism is
supposed to relate to humanism in Kaunda’s thought. Is socialism a stage towards
humanism, something intermediate before full human empathy is achieved? Or is
socialism an aspect of humanism? The two are not of course the same. After all, Karl
Marx regarded capitalism as a stage towards socialism; but that did not make
capitalism an aspect of socialism in Marx’s sense.
There is a third question. Is socialism in fact an alternative to humanism as an
ideology for Africa? The two might be progressive and equally legitimate. In this
sense, Kaunda could be a humanist and Nyerere a socialist—and the two be both
progressive and in alliance. A few months ago I talked at length with President
Kaunda and he spoke of how some of his peers used to pull his leg concerning his
idea of ‘humanism’. Julius Nyerere jested with Kaunda, telling him that his
‘humanism’ was popular with the West because it was ultimately soft on Western
interests. Kaunda denied that humanism was a soft vision in that sense. And I’m sure
he would deny that his moves to nationalise Western mineral interests in Zambia were
partly in response to the taunts of friends like Julius Nyerere. But, in the end, Kaunda
is a pragmatist caught in the turmoil both of the political upheaval of Southern Africa
and the economic disarray of the copper market. Between this copper devil and the
deep waters of regional conflict, Kaunda has had to make adjustments to reconcile
ideology to reality. But in our conversation I was particularly intrigued by his belief in
world government. Not many heads of state in the world subscribe to that vision, and
very few heads of state in Africa have the time to indulge in such ambitious
futurology. Kaunda’s belief in world government enabled me to begin to see why he
called himself a ‘humanist’. In his view, violence in man can ultimately be controlled

3

only through a combination of two things—the self-restraint of the individual person
and the global discipline of the world authority.
He had once been a devout Gandhian, subscribing to satyagraha as the force of
discipline of the soul. He was converted to passive resistance as a strategy of struggle
for freedom and justice. When Kaunda became head of state he discovered before
long the need to use violence. This included violence to suppress the fanatical
religious movement of Alice Lenshina in 1964. In desperation, as the fanatics killed
and maimed, Kaunda virtually save his security forces a freehand to use as much
counter- violence in suppressing the movement as the security forces thought
necessary. It included instructions to shoot to kill. Kaunda was caught up in the
dialectic of a state trying to monopolise the legitimacy of the use of physical force
within its boundaries. In pursuit of that monopoly the state is often driven to use
violence against its own citizens. Given that Kaunda is attracted to the theory of nonviolence and its moral implications, and at the same time is forced to recognise that
the global state system tends to be violent by nature, it is not surprising that the
President of Zambia has veered towards a belief in world government. His two
principles of individual self-restraint and global authority begin to appear as
interdependent. He seems to some extent to be resigned to the persistence of at least
certain forms of violence in Africa, and indeed in the world, for as long as the state
system continues. And, given that there are states in the world, someone has to head
them. He is one such head himself, in spite of the deep-seated revulsion against
violence.
As this decade comes to a close some old questions about Africa and its conflicts still
persist. How dangerous are the artificial state frontiers created by imperial
experience? How unstable is the ethnic mixture within each African country? One of
the closing illustrations of interstate conflicts in the 1970s was the military
confrontation between Uganda and Tanzania from October 1978 to April of this year.
In the course of that conflict, there was increasing evidence that President Nyerere
had launched a doctrine of Pax Tanzaniana —the doctrine of pursuing peace and
stability in other countries under the auspices of Tanzania. Pax Tanzaniana had points
of comparison with Pax Britannica. The British had once aspired to consolidate peace
and terminate tribal warfare through British initiative. Tanzania had had comparable
moral ambitions on a more modest scale, even if it involved direct intervention or
interference. Sometimes there has been no disagreement among Africans. In Southern
Africa, Pax Tanzaniana has been part of Tanzania’s leadership of the front line states.
This has been widely accepted in Africa. There was also a time when Fax Tanzaniana
sought to influence the destiny of Nigeria. Mwalimu Nyerere recognised Biafra in
April 1968. The Mwalimu was seeking a solution to the Nigerian civil war, and was
on the side of the separatists in that primary conflict.
Then there was Tanzania’s decision to close the border with Kenya—to teach Kenya a
lesson, and, some would argue, to create sufficient instability in Kenya for a change
of régime. In the case of Uganda, Tanzania sought to punish the Amin régime
militarily. In the case of Kenya, Tanzania has attempted to teach the government in
Nairobi a lesson by economic means. The Mwalimu of Tanzania—and let us
remember that the Swahili word mwalimu does mean ‘teacher’ —has often lived up to
his name, dispensing lessons both to distant and neighbouring states.

4

Tanzania’s invasion of Uganda was unprecedented in the history of Africa. What one
wonders is whether it establishes a precedent of one African country invading another
in order to change the régime in power. A qualitative modification may have taken
place in the structure of the state system in Africa. Tanzania may only be the first of
new sub-imperial powers in the continent. Pax Tanzaniana may have imitators in the
years ahead. Fears of this kind were certainly expressed quite forcefully at the first
summit meeting of the Organisation of African Unity following the successful capture
of Kampala. It remains to be seen whether the OAU will introduce changes in its own
machinery, and perhaps even establish a security apparatus of its own, strong enough
to reduce, if not completely eliminate, the danger of major military invasions between
African countries themselves in the years ahead.
What confronts Africa is a choice between a system of collective security and a
system of international vigilantism. An African high command or a police force under
the OAU would provide a structure for pan-African security. A number of Frenchspeaking African countries have recommended that this should be established,
especially since last year’s invasion of the Shaba province of Zaire by opponents of
President Mobuto operating from Angola. Moroccan troops formed the nucleus of the
African force which replaced the French troops in war-ravaged Shaba after the
invasion. The King of Morocco and the President of Senegal, among others, felt that it
was time for Africa to establish its own machinery of continental law-enforcement.
Nyerere was among those who opposed this initiative. Nyerere had his own good
reasons for doing so, not least because he suspected that France was playing the part
of an invisible prompter at the side of the francophone stage.
Nevertheless, the idea of a pan-African security system could have been examined
independently of the controversy surrounding France’s role in suppressing the
antiMobuto invaders of Shaba province. By opposing the proposed force, Nyerere
helped to reduce the options available to the Organisation of African Unity in matters
of collective security. The only viable alternative was international vigilantism of
precisely the kind Tanzania embarked upon when it invaded Uganda and toppled the
Amin régime this year.
Nyerere violated international law partly in order to return Uganda to the rules of
international decency. He helped to terminate arbitrary rule in Uganda by himself
resorting to an act of international arbitrariness. One is reminded of the old American
frontier days when ‘vigilance committees’, as they were called, consisting of
dedicated citizens, attempted to maintain law and order by summary proceedings.
Nyerere does not believe in summary justice in his domestic policies. He is in reality a
liberal democrat with a socialist veneer. But he has practised summary justice in his
foreign policy. The economic actions against Kenya and the military invasion of
Amin’s Uganda are his most striking exercises in international vigilantism.
But can one blame him? Isn’t the whole area of Africa’s international relations still an
untamed frontier? Is there not a need for vigilantes? Political banditry is certainly still
on the loose in the continent. Idi Amin was a bandit and deserved his final fate. But
there is a crying need for proper pan-African procedures rather than just vigilante
initiatives. I would not worry too much if every African vigilante was Nyerere—
humane, sophisticated and sensitive to the wider implications of every act of policy.

5

Nyerere may commit major international blunders from time to time— including his
recognition of Biafra in April 1968—but his heart is probably in the right place.
Unfortunately, we can’t guarantee that every international vigilante will be a Nyerere.
It would be a greater service to Africa if Nyerere joined those francophone states that
are groping for a continental system of collective security. His involvement would
itself reduce the danger of this pan-African security system being manipulated by
France.
What is needed is a marriage between Nkrumah’s old idea of an African high
command designed to keep imperialist invaders at bay and the newly proposed panAfrican force designed to put the African house in order. Africa needs to be protected
both from external enemies and from internal deviants. There is a crying need in the
continent for collective military self-reliance. The presence of Cuban troops to do
Africa’s dirty work is a humiliating confession of the continent’s military impotence.
Here was a region with large armies scattered in different societies, but armies better
at repressing their own people, rather than at liberating other parts of the continent.
Why were Cuban troops necessary to stem the South African challenge in Angola in
1975 and 1976? There were, after all, enough African states in sympathy with the
Popular Movement for the liberation of Angola. Why did they not put their
armaments where their mouths were—and intervene on behalf of the MPLA.
The Organisation of African Unity has recognised the special diplomatic role of the
front line states in Southern Africa. Before long the OAU should also contribute to the
military defence of the front line states. Some of them, after all, have already suffered
militarily from the white- dominated regimes. Reprisal raids into the front line states
will get worse in the future when the wars of liberation engulf the Republic of South
Africa itself.
Protecting Africa from external enemies and internal deviants needs more than
vigilante exercises from time to time. It needs the political will to transcend Africa’s
own fragmentation and establish a capacity for self-defence, and self-pacification.
After all, these are two of the pillars for genuine self-development.

6

