REITH LECTURES 1979: The African Condition
Ali Mazrui
Lecture 4: The Burden of Underdevelopment
TRANSMISSION: 28 November 1979 – Radio 4

Estimates of Africa’s resources are on the whole tentative, but it is already fair to say
that Africa has 96 per cent of the non-Communist world’s diamonds, 60 per cent of its
gold, 42 per cent of its cobalt, 34 per cent of its bauxite and 28 per cent of its uranium.
The West’s interest in Africa’s oil has also significantly increased, partly in
proportion to the political uncertainties surrounding the Middle Eastern suppliers. Had
Nigeria joined the Arab oil embargo of the United States in 1973 the consequences for
America would have been severe. In 1974—the year following the embargo—the
United States’ balance of payments deficit with Nigeria was already three billion
dollars. It rose to five billion dollars two years later. For the time being, America’s
dependence on Nigerian oil continues to be critical. Then there is Africa’s agricultural
potential. The Sudan, Africa’s largest country in square miles, may indeed develop
into a major bread-basket for parts of Africa and the Middle East before the end of
this century. There are also Africa’s water resources, with some of the greatest rivers
of the world. The potential for building dams and generating hydro-electric power has
only just begun to be exploited. In short, the continent itself seems to be well
endowed with resources, but a disproportionate number of people in the population of
the continent are undernourished and underprivileged, a situation of anomalous
underdevelopment.
A substantial part of the explanation lies in the nature of Africa’s economic links with
the Western world across time. Trade is the oldest of the different areas of economic
interaction. Afro-European trade goes back to the slave trade and to the traffic in
firearms, and beyond. In subsequent years there was also investment in Africa’s
mineral and agricultural wealth and sources of power and energy. This grew at a
modest pace until the Second World War. The war itself was an important divide in
Africa’s history. It helped to liberate the continent politically, but it also enslaved it
economically. The political liberation was achieved partly by undermining Western
Europe’s capacity to hold on to empires. Britain was exhausted and substantially
impoverished by the time the war ended. France had been humiliated in defeat at the
hands of the Germans.
Related t all this was the destruction of the myth of European invincibility in the eyes
of the colonised peoples. Suddenly somebody in Bombay noticed that the emperor’s
new clothes of modern technology were not clothes at all—the British Raj was naked!
And when the Indians started pointing fingers and exposing the nakedness of their
emperor other subject peoples elsewhere saw it too. The precedent set by India in
challenging British rule became an important inspiration to many African nationalists.
At a more individual level the war also cut the white man down to size in African
eyes. The colonised Africans had had their humanity reduced because they were
regarded as part devils and part monkeys. They certainly had their adulthood reduced
when they were often equated with children. As I was growing up in Mombasa in the

1

1940s the film censors declared some films as being ‘not suitable for Africans and
children under 16’. Since the population of Mombasa was in part racially mixed, and
many Arabs looked like Africans, there were two kinds of identification test at the
door of the cinema: you either had to persuade the ticket clerk that you were really an
Arab, or that you were 16. This equation of Africanity with childhood began to be
upset as a result of war experiences and the role of African soldiers in combat as
brave and determined adults.
On the other hand, Europeans had been portrayed as super-adults and virtually
superhuman. The war, too, humanised white men in the eyes of their African
colleagues as they fought together in the Horn of Africa, in North Africa, in Malaya
and elsewhere. To observe a white man scared to death under fire was itself a
revelation to many Africans, who had previously seen white men only in their
arrogant commanding posture as a colonial elite. Another effect of the war was to
broaden the general social and political horizons not only of ex-servicemen but of
many Africans who had remained behind.
It was clear, as I grew up, that my father and his friends regarded the contending
forces in Europe partly as soccer teams writ large, and the Africans—the fans, if you
like—were placing their bets on the European powers at war with one another. East
Africa had, of course, once known both German rule in Tanganyika, Rwanda and
Burundi, and British rule in Uganda and Kenya. The two colonial and former colonial
powers at war with each other were, on the one hand, ominous masters, and on the
other, frivolous soccer teams in deadly rivalry with each other.
But the very fact that my father and his friends debated the progress of the war almost
as if it were the progress of a football match increased their interest in world affairs
and broadened their vision of human possibilities. For millions of Africans all over
the continent the Second World War was an important internationalising experience.
By the end of it many of them were ready to agitate for freedom and independence.
The principal consequence of the war was that the pinnacle of world power was no
longer in Western Europe but divided between Washington and Moscow. The two
superpowers both had a tradition of anti- imperialism in at least some sense, though
both are also guilty of other forms of imperialism. What is clear is that the rise of the
Soviet Union and the pre-eminence of the United States after the Second World War
created pressures on European powers to make concessions to African nationalists
struggling for independence.
Paradoxically, the economic impact of the war was enslaving rather than liberating.
Partly in pursuit of war needs African agriculture was modified to produce urgently
needed supplies and food for Europe. In some parts of Africa there was a major
depression later on when war demand for African-produced goods declined, but the
structure of African agriculture had by then already entered a new phase of export
bias. The war also helped to transform colonial policy from the morality of
maintaining law and order in Africa (Pax Britannica) to a new imperial morality of
increasing development in the colonies and pursuing the welfare of the colonised
people. Britain established the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund as part of this
new machinery of the imperial Vision.

2

But these thrusts of development were themselves a further aggravation of Africa’s
incorporation into Western capitalism. The Colonial Development and Welfare Fund
contributed in its own way towards deepening both Africa’s economic dependency on
the West and Africa’s cultural imitation of the West. Cash crops for export were given
priority as against food for local people. One-quarter to one- third of the total
cultivated area in some of the more fertile colonies was devoted to the production of
such export commodities as cocoa in Ghana, coffee in Uganda, groundnuts in Senegal
and the Gambia, pyrethrum in Tanganyika, and tea in Kenya.
The urban bias was another distortion which occurred in the development process.
Much of the economic change, internally, subordinated the needs of the countryside to
the needs of the towns. One consequence was the volume of migration from rural
areas to urban centres. The crisis of habitability continued to beset the lot of the
country folk. Young men struggled for a while, - then downed their tools and hit the
high road towards the uncertain fortunes of the capital city.
A third bias within each country was the sub-regional distortion. Some parts of the
country were just much more developed than others. This burden of uneven
development had its own stresses and strains. By being more developed than its
neighbours the Buganda sub-region of Uganda, for example, acquired not only extra
leverage but also attracted the passionate jealousies, the distrust, of other parts of the
country.
Development in Africa has also bee1 distorted by the economic activity of white
settlers. In 1938, out of a total of more than £1,000 million invested in the continent
from outside, no less than half was invested in South Africa. A further £102 million
was invested in Rhodesia. These countries under white-settler control acquired, in
addition, considerable economic muscle in their own parts of the continent, with
leverage over their neighbours. Rhodesia exercised considerable economic influence
over Zambia, Malawi, Botswana and Mozambique.
The fifth bias in Africa’s development takes us back to capitalism, for; in this case,
we are dealing with the capitalist focus of Africa’s recent economic history absorption into international structures of trade and capital flows, belief in the
efficacy of market forces, faith in the profit motive and private enterprise, distrust of
state initiatives in the economy, and optimism about the development value of foreign
investment. It is partly the nature of these biases in the history of economic change in
the continent that has condemned Africa to its present state of underdevelopment.
So what can be done to help Africa get out of this predicament? Can it modernise
without Westernising? I would define modernisation as change in a direction which is
compatible with the present stage of human knowledge, and which does justice to the
human person as an innovative and social being. If a society does not want to take
into account present-day levels of knowledge, science and scholarship, that society is
pre-modern. If a society suppresses innovation, and insists on doing things according
only to tradition, again that society is pre-modern. H a society interprets the concept
of man as a social being too narrowly; limiting social loyalties to clans and tribes or
even just to nations, and it turns its back on the outer world of fellow human beings,
that society is still pre-modern. If you define modernity, then, according to these three
basic principles of responsiveness to the highest levels of knowledge, encouragement

3

of innovation, and enlargement of social sympathies, there are clearly different roads
to modernity.
For the Third World the best way forward is to adopt those three principles of
modernity on the one hand and, on the other, to pursue strategies of decolonisation
and of reducing dependency. It is a dual effort—to modernise and decolonise at the
same time. In a sense, it is an effort to decolonise modernity.
How can we marry these principles to strategies of decolonisation and liberation? I
think there are a number of possibilities. The first is to some extent already under
way: the strategy of indigenisation, of using local manpower and other local resources
as far as possible. Africa must also have greater use of its traditional technology and
know-how. The struggle for simpler forms of technology is part of the process of
reducing reliance on outsiders for sophisticated know-how. In recent times there has
been increased interest in traditional African medicine, for example, with special
reference to some of the effective herbs which were used in therapy.
My second way of transcending dependency is what I call the strategy of
domestication. This involves making a resource which is foreign more relevant and
more appropriate for the African situation. For example, Parliament in Nairobi is in
conception a foreign institution. It has all the paraphernalia of Parliament at
Westminster but without the sanctity of tradition, without the stamp of authenticity.
But when the late President Kenyatta ordered that deliberations in the Kenyan
Parliament were from 1974 to be in Kiswahili instead of in English this was a major
stage in the domestication of the parliamentary institution in Kenya. Anomalies have
remained. The language of debate is indeed Kiswahili but the laws which come before
Parliament are couched in the English language. The official language of the
constitution when it is being interpreted in the law courts is English, but the basic
language of national politics is Kiswahili.
Then there is the domestication of the economy. This involves a reduction of its
export-orientation, and an enhancement of the focus on domestic food needs and other
local requirements. Sometimes emphasising labour-intensive technology instead of
capital-intensive is itself a form of domesticating the techniques of production,
distribution, communication and exchange. Labour- intensive technology is a form of
democratising modernity, involving more and more people in the process of modern
production, and utilising a major resource of even the poorest of the African countries
- the human resource.
My third strategy for transcending dependency is diversification. I start from the
premise that there are occasions when freedom begins with the multiplication of one’s
masters. To be dependent on two giants, especially when the giants are rivals, is
sometimes an opportunity to play one against the other—and maximise one’s own
options.
African societies must therefore diversify and sometimes multiply their trading
partners. This at times may require that they also diversify what they produce,
avoiding the dangers that arise from being dependent on one or two commodities.
There is also the need to diversify one’s investors. French-speaking countries tend to
be excessively preoccupied with encouraging French investment instead of trying to

4

attract other investors as well. To that extent their freedom of manoeuvre is more
restricted. Then there is the need to diversify one’s aid donors. Multilateral aid affords
more latitude than bilateral aid, and having diverse benefactors can be more liberating
than being dependent on only one source of support. OPEC has now become one
additional source of aid for developing countries—thus increasing their options.
Ideologically, Africa also needs to diversify its options. Many African countries are
closed ideological systems at the moment. This perpetuates mental and intellectual
dependency. They should be open enough to let contending ideological forces
compete for influence. Western individualism, Marxist class concepts, Gandhian ideas
of compromise, as well as traditional values underpinning African cultures
themselves, all these should be let loose on the free market of ideas.
My fourth strategy of liberation for transcending dependency is co-operation and
trade among the developing countries themselves—that is, among the
underprivileged. Until now the bulk of trade has been between the rich industrialised
countries of the Northern Hemisphere, what I would call north-north trade. Second in
importance is the economic interaction between the Northern Hemisphere and the
developing countries (north-south trade). Only third in importance is trade, investment
and aid among developing countries themselves, or south-south economic interaction.
Egypt’s and India’s export of manpower to other developing countries, the Arab
world’s aid to African and Asian countries, and Cuba’s military assistance to such
countries as Angola and Ethiopia—all these illustrate the possibilities. The
acceleration of this trend is an important aspect of the whole struggle against
dependency.
The next step beyond this is the strategy of what I call counter-penetration into the
citadels of power. The Third World must increase its share in the economies of the
developed industrial nations themselves, and therefore enhance Third World leverage
over those economies. For decades the Middle East, for example, was controlled by
others, partly because of its oil. And then a number of countries, realising the
importance of this asset, formed a producers’ cartel, OPEC, and before very long a
resource which had caused them to be subjugated became a weapon in their hands—a
weapon capable of being wielded against the very imperial powers that had once
dominated them.
Of course oil is an exceptional case. It is a very forceful weapon to use against the
industrial nations. But my generalisation still stands. The spirit of counter- penetration
by the Third World into the Northern Hemisphere must begin with a re-evaluation by
the Third World of how best to utilise their own resources and gain maximum
influence over international events. At least as important is the need for Third World
countries, including members of OPEC, to maintain a sense of solidarity against the
industrial nations. I am not myself disturbed when members of OPEC invest or buy
shares in Krupp industries in Germany, or Kuwait seeks a portion of the Benz
bonanza, or Saudi princes invest in real estate in London or in California, or when
Nigerian funds are carefully placed in Western banks. All this is what counterpenetration is about. If Nigeria had not discovered that its oil could be a weapon in
promoting enlightened Western policies for Southern Africa, and if Nigeria had not
counter-penetrated Western economies, the impact that Lagos has had on Western
policy-making would have been considerably reduced.

5

I do not agree therefore with those scholars and analysts who feel the Third World
should actually disengage from the international capitalist system. It is too late to
disengage. The industrialised countries could gradually destroy the world through
pollution and other forms of ecological damage, or impoverish it by an indiscriminate
or even reckless depletion of resources. Third World countries simply cannot afford to
pull out of the system. The gains which OPEC has enabled the Third World to make
must not be thrown away in a mood of militant abdication and withdrawal.
Economic liberation also depends on austerity in the Third World. Limited local
resources must not be wasted, and there should be greater restraint on the importation
of luxury goods. The gap must be narrowed between the elite and the masses. There
must be a strategy of income distribution and, where appropriate, land reform. But the
austerity needn’t go to the extent of hampering the satisfaction of basic human needs.
Efforts should be made to make possible minimum nutrition levels, minimum health
care, minimum educational opportunities for children and the like.
But ultimately the push in each developing country should be in the direction of
discipline, restraint and austerity. I know that is easier said than done, but experiments
are already under way in places like Tanzania, Somalia, Mozambique and GuineaBissau. Side by side with this policy of southern austerity we should encourage
northern extravagance for the time being. In the short term at least it would be
disastrous for the Third World if the United States and its allies actually succeeded in
making a real cut in oil consumption. An America self-sufficient in oil is an America
invulnerable to external pressures.
True interdependence in the world requires mutual vulnerability to one another’s
pressures. If the northern industrialised countries can play havoc with the economies
of the Third World just by drinking less coffee than they have done the previous year,
or by using less copper this decade than the last, it is vital that the Southern
Hemisphere should also find ways of holding the industrialised nations to ransom if
need be. I am not just talking about using resources which can be consumed. Imagine
for a moment the power of gold in the hands of a black South African government.
Think how easily that could be used to de-stabilise the international monetary order.
That’s what I’m talking about.
Bertrand Russell used to say that civilisation was born out of the pursuit of luxury. He
might have added that civilisation sometimes declines out of the pursuit of excessive
luxury. The current extravagance in the consumption of oil in the United States, and
even the exceptionally high standard of living in Western Europe as a whole, might
have reached the stage of excessive luxury. The decline of Western civilisation might
well be at hand. It is in the interests of humanity that such a decline should take place.
This would allow the different segments of the human race to enjoy a more equitable
share, not only of the resources of the planet, but also of the power to control its
future.

6

