REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 2: The New Magicians
TRANSMISSION: 12 November 1980 – Radio 4

My view can be stated briefly. Modern medicine has taken the wrong path. An
inappropriate form of medicine has been created, in large part by doctors and medical
scientists, and eagerly accepted by a willing populace. I will go further. The nature of
modern medicine makes it positively deleterious to the health and wellbeing of the
population. We have all been willing participants in allowing the creation of a myth,
because it seems to serve our interests to believe that illness can be vanquished and
death postponed until further notice, while it serves the interests of doctors to see
themselves and be seen as, if not miracle workers (and of course they would be the
first to deny this), then at least as possible miracle workers.
Science has destroyed our faith in religion. Reason has challenged our trust in magic.
What more appropriate result could there be than the appearance of new magicians
and priests wrapped in the cloak of science and reason? Please understand that it is
we, all of us, who have hitched our wagon to the wrong star, scientific medicine, as
our guiding light. The unhappy consequence is that medicine is perceived and pursued
in ways which do not best serve the needs of society. We do not put to best use the
skills and abilities of those who have become its practitioners.
Let me explain in a series of points what I see as the path taken by modern medicine
and how it may be the wrong one. I intend to concentrate on doctors and their
attitudes and training. They may represent only seven per cent of the National Health
Service workforce, as against, for example, nurses, who represent 43 per cent, but it is
they, the doctors, who spend the money and wield the power. Let me make it clear at
the outset that, as in all things, what are involved here are questions of emphasis and
balance. I know we can all point to many worthy features of medicine. But, on
balance, I find modern medicine wanting.
First, as now taught and practised, medicine is avowedly and self-consciously
scientific. Far be it from me to stand against the tide of history and suggest there is
more to understanding and caring than contained within the four corners of science.
But an education which demands high skills in scientific subjects before going to
medical school and, once there, involves years of breathing the heady air of one after
another field of scientific endeavour, produces what it is intended to produce: a doctor
who sees himself as a scientist. It may not produce what is so often needed: someone
who can care. I am not suggesting that medical education should not be scientific. Of
course it has to be. But room must be found for other disciplines, particularly the
humanities. Admittedly, some attempts to meet this point have recently been made in
some medical schools. But the late Professor Henry Miller, who was Dean at
Newcastle Medical School, was moved to say that the emphasis was still
fundamentally scientific, such that what he saw as ‘the crisis in medical education’
still remained unsolved. Moreover, the science now taught only compounds the

1

problem. It is concerned with reaction, response, to ills which already au the sufferer,
instead of emphasising concern for the causes and origins of illness, with a view to
preventing them. So, medicine may be called the healing art, but in the practice of that
art it is the scientific method which is portrayed as the best, if not the only, way.
My next point is that modern medicine is thought of as dispensing cures. The image
created of medicine has increasingly been that of a curative science in which the
model of the doctor is that of the engineer- mechanic curing a sick engine. This has
reached its high point in what I see as an attitude to death, in which dying has come to
be regarded as an illness. Call it an illness and you hold out hope of treatment, control
and even cure. Doctor, patient and family become locked in an unholy ‘danse
macabre’. Medicine provides another variation on the theme of the pursuit of
immortality, with the respirator symbolising some kind of Promethean eternity. But
the engineer-mechanic model is an unfortunate one. Quite simply, the problems that
beset us now do not seem readily amenable to cure. And I speak now of the generality
of ills; those that kill us before our time— cancer, heart disease, respiratory problems
and accidents—or those that chip away at our daily pursuit of tranquillity—colds and
coughs, aches and pains and simple unhappiness. I do not seek—indeed, it would be
quite wrong—to belittle the contribution scientific medicine has made and continues
to make, both in curing infections, at least in their short-term effects, and in
controlling and soothing numerous otherwise intolerable conditions: in reducing
sickness, even if it has had little effect on mortality. But the most common causes of
death and the most common debilitating diseases still remain beyond the reach of the
doctor. Cures there are not.
The idea of the doctor as an engineer involved in a curative science produces a further
consequence which I shall make my third point. It is that doctors are encouraged to
adopt the mentality that they are problem-solvers. Problems exist out there in the
world which it is their job to solve. What is wrong with that, you ask? Well, it is
wrong in several respects. It is a mentality which creates problems. Indeed, the more
efficiently doctors look for problems, the more they find and the more problemsolvers we need. It is a mentality which converts modern medical care into crisis care.
We wait for a crisis, problem, then we take it to the doctor and expect him to solve it.
It is a mentality which fosters the impression that the problem can be solved, an
impression all of us readily adopt. Finally, it is a mentality which ignores the notion
that problems can be avoided, that waiting for them to arise and then responding to
them is a less than adequate way of providing health care.
Another consequence of perceiving medicine as a scientific exercise has meant that it
is conceptualised and practised only in terms of specific diseases. Medicine is thus
committed to a process of reductionism. The totality of a complex human being, the
product of innumerable forces, involving subtle balances and interrelationships, is
broken down. He becomes no more than a collection of parts, one or more of which is
diseased. Each disease then has its particular name, locus and nature. It is this entity
called the disease which then receives attention, not the person. I am not saying we
should abandon the notion of disease. It serves a purpose and, anyway, it is too much
a part of our vocabulary to exorcise it now. But, if illness is seen only in terms of
specific diseases, this induces a form of tunnel vision. Medicine loses sight of the
whole person. Miss A. becomes an X-ray projected on a screen, Baby B. becomes a
bad case of meningitis, Mr C. becomes the pain in the neck at four o’clock.

2

My fifth point is that modern medicine teaches that the appropriate response of the
doctor to our complaint is to do something, and something aimed at the particular
disease entity. If the doctor has been educated to think of himself as a scientist
problem-solver and if there is a disease lurking somewhere, then it is his job to seek it
out and remedy it. Some form of bodily intervention which is disease-specific is
usually sought. Something must be done both to satisfy the expectations of the
patient, and the professional pride of the doctor, and it has to be done to the disease,
which is portrayed in terms redolent of morality or religion as something bad or
wrong which is possessing the body. The process has become one of applying
taxonomical skills, skills in classifying so as to identify the disease and then deciding
upon the appropriate disease-specific response. Indeed, the process may be even less
complicated. One study has shown that the consultant, knowing the limited range of
treatments he has available, is typically concerned from the outset with the simple
question: which treatment is most suitable? The choice is then validated by appeal to
the diagnosis. What is wrong with this mentality of doing something? It is medicine
by reflex, wait for the problem and then do something. It is medicine aimed at fixing
parts. It is medicine which ignores such questions as how the state of affairs came
about, or what the long- or short-term effects of the chosen response will be. It is
medicine which particularly ignores the question: should anything be done at all?
Such questions will tend to be lost in the display of pseudo-scientific wizardry.
The doctor is not alone in cultivating this mentality. You only have to look at
advertisements in the press or on television to see how the notion of disease and
disease-specific response is manipulated by drug companies so as to sell their
products. Diagrams, effective for all their banality, show target areas with the product
winging its way to knock out pain, indigestion, headache, or whatever, and, of course,
no one encourages this more than we ourselves. It is so much more satisfying to know
that you have arthritis than to be unsure what is the matter. The knowledge operates to
put your mind at ease. It could, after all, have been another disease of greater menace
on the Richter Scale. But such knowledge says nothing about whether the illness
could have been avoided or what impact it will have on your future lifestyle.
The sixth point concerning the -inappropriate form medicine has taken is that
medicine is increasingly thought of in terms of hospitals. Indeed, the number of
hospitals is often cited as a measure of the quality of health care. For example, the
Soviet Union was able to claim in the mid-Seventies that, except for Sweden and
Norway, it had overtaken all other industrialised nations in the ratio of hospital beds
to population size. The implication was that its system of health care had equally
advanced, despite the longstanding inadequacy of its primary care services,
particularly in the countryside. The nonsense of this approach is obvious. Indeed,
apart from units concerned with accidents and, perhaps, obstetrics, the fact that an
ever-increasing proportion of our health service budget, now 70 per cent, goes to
hospitals could be said to be evidence of the failures of health care and how we
perceive it. If ever there was a case of putting the cart before the horse, this is it. If
preventive medicine, school health care, community health care and general primary
tare meant anything, hospitals would be far less needed. Hospitals are the epitome of
the problem-solving, disease-oriented, scientific engineer approach. And this idea of
hospital-dominated medicine is constantly reinforced in our minds, if only by such
things as radio and television programmes, whether they take the form of a soap-opera

3

or a demonstration of the gee- whiz surgical skills displayed recently in the BBC
television programmes Your Life in Their Hands. The reasons for thinking of
medicine in terms of hospitals are many. Medical students are trained in hospitals.
Hospitals are where they learn to see themselves as scientist problem-solvers and
curers. Hospitals, particularly teaching hospitals are where all the interesting problems
are. Hospital doctors see themselves, and encourage others to see them, as an elite,
and those in the teaching hospitals are, of course, a kind of super-elite— leaders of the
medical world, shapers of medical education. These teachers become the role models
for the future. To borrow Professor Miller’s words, ‘the company of biochemists and
geneticists remains more stimulating and more attractive to the bright young medical
man than that of social workers and chiropodists’.
It should not come as a surprise that we have exported this same mentality to
developing countries. The 1980 World Bank report points to the inappropriate
emphasis on curative rather than preventive care, to the excessive construction of
hospitals and to the education of doctors which is often not geared to their countries
needs, stressing rare diseases and the use of costly equipment while neglecting local
health problems. Two-thirds of the health budget of most developing countries goes to
medical education and teaching hospitals. The limitations of adopting this approach in
developing countries is illustrated by a medical school programme in Colombia for
the hospital care of premature infants. Survival rates were achieved which compared
well with those in the United States. But 70 per cent of the infants discharged were
dead within three months because of infection, malnutrition and general poverty.
With the increasing emphasis on hospitals as the hub of medical care has come
another unfortunate feature of modern medicine: that medicine is and should be an
enterprise calling for the use of ever more advanced and complex technology.
Christiaan Barnard filled the massive football stadium in Rio twice when he talked of
his first heart transplant, yet the majority of his audience could not afford the simple
medicine to rid themselves of their intestinal worms. And, in his own country, Oxfam
was giving out measles vaccine to malnourished children whose lives were at risk
from infection. In such a context Schweitzer, in his hospital at Lamberene, is a
somewhat ludicrous figure, dissipating his energies, albeit for the most noble of
reasons. Pressure on the French government from someone of his stature could well
have produced better results for the health of the people of Equatorial Africa than
losing himself in a jungle hospital, trying to patch up broken lives.
More and more diagnostic aids, surgical tools and supportive equipment, each more
complex than the last, not to mention drugs, the National Health Service bill for which
last year amounted to £1,000 million, are pressed on doctors. The trend is as
predictable as it is regrettable. If you are trained to think of yourself as a scientist
problem-solver, raised in an environment of white coats and machinery where people
are constantly being monitored and measured, it is inevitable that you will want the
latest machine. Recourse to advanced technology is deemed entirely proper. And
those who manufacture such machinery will ensure that the hospital realises that
without this particular advanced scanner, or whatever, the care being offered may well
be thought of as substandard. The combination of the hospital administration’s
nervousness and the doctor’s professional self-image is more than enough to ensure
that the machine is categorised as essential, to be obtained as soon as possible. In case
you think the picture I am painting is a caricature, consider the National Health

4

Service’s distinction awards which are given to hospital consultants. The three
specialities in which consultants most frequently receive awards are thoracic surgery,
neurosurgery and cardiology. Consultants in geriatrics and mental health, two areas
where technology has least to offer, although the two areas are blessed with the most
patients, receive the fewest awards. So, government, with the aid of the profession,
reinforces this technological approach to medicine which I am seeking to illustrate
and criticise. The lure of high technology is irresistible to the doctor, serving as both
validation and vindication of his training and of his image of himself as really the
scientist problem-solver and curer. It is this same mentality which impels the search
for so-called wonder drugs. Though doctors may well frown at the term, the pursuit
goes on unabashed. Medical research exerts a spell over governments and foundations
and thus the public. The spell is that something is just around the corner, a
breakthrough is imminent. We are all mesmerised and the premise largely goes
unquestioned: whether scientific technological medicine is the right way? Recently,
even the much respected medical correspondent of The Times was moved to write of
‘the battle against breast cancer’ under the headline: ‘Is breast cancer next for
treatment breakthrough?’ Interferon, an agent produced by the body and alleged to
have therapeutic properties, is the latest candidate. It would, of course, be wonderful
if it were true, but the record of wonder drugs has not been good since the 1950s.
These are some of the ways in which medicine has taken the wrong path. They are, of
course, painted with the broad brush. It is important to realise that I am not denying
that every day, up and down the country, wonderful things are being done. Despite
this, could the nation’s health be better, or if not better then no worse, at some gain,
financial and social, to the citizenry if medicine took a different form?
But the present state of medicine will take some changing. It is cultivated by the
medical profession. It flatters the self esteem of the doctor to see himself as the
problem-solving scientist spreading health. And the present state of medicine has
readily been adopted by a lay public, anxious always for the ideal in health as in other
things, and with expectations which may be unwarranted but which are, of course, a
product of the claims made by medicine. None the less, although it seems to satisfy
the aspirations of the doctor as well as the expectations of the public, in the event no
one is satisfied. For a start, the cost of financing medicine in the form it now takes is
clearly beyond what we are willing to pay in the form of taxation. We complain if we
are asked to forgo anything, but we vote for promises of reduced taxation and reduced
public spending. Of course, the dissatisfaction doctors feel, as rising national costs are
reflected in their income tax, is tinged with a professional reluctance to countenance
any cuts in expenditure on medical care. Indeed, they are voluble, for example, in
their demand for the so-called freedom to prescribe, whatever the cost. If drugs were
prescribed under their general chemical name rather than under a specific company’s
brand name, the NHS would make a considerable saving. Yet doctors resist such an
obvious financial control as an unconscionable interference in their rights. No one
seems to ask where such rights come from, if not from us. Equally, doctors are the
first to urge the acquisition of ever more expensive equipment. Also, albeit with less
stridency, they can be heard arguing the need for better conditions for hospital
patients. And finally, of course, when it comes to their pay, they have not been slow
to keep themselves at or near the head of the professional league, while at the same
time insisting on the right to private practice in addition. The bitter comment
attributed to Aneurin Bevan that, to win over the consultants to the cause of the

5

National Health Service, he had ‘choked their mouths with gold’, echoes down the
years.
Another reason for dissatisfaction with the state of modern medicine is that we, the
public, have been led to expect too much and have been more than willing partners in
the process. We have come almost to believe in magic cures and the waving of wands.
The reality is a constant disappointment. The promised or expected cures are not
there. We are also disappointed for another reason. The simple fact is that for large
numbers of people the many and varied services offered by medicine are just not
available. And I do not mean here the interventionist, hospital-based medicine I have
criticised. I mean the preventive and primary care which large segments of the
population do not have ready access to and which, if it were accompanied by other
appropriate social measures, would help them pursue and enjoy more healthy lives. I
will return to this theme at much greater length next week. Now, I will merely refer
you to the 1979 report of the Royal Commission on the Health Service which makes
the general point most clearly. ‘In some declining urban areas the National Health
Service is failing dismally to provide an adequate primary care system. Since the
establishment of the NHS the position of those in social classes four and five appears
to have worsened relative to those in social classes one and two.’ Now, more than
ever, wealthier means healthier.
A final reason for dissatisfaction is the role the doctor finds himself playing. Reality
casts him in a far different role from the one which he has been trained to expect and
perform. A tension is produced between the model and the reality, and it has severe
repercussions on the morale of doctors. Take the general practitioner. A large part of
his daily clientele are people who quite simply are unhappy. In the absence of anyone
else to go to and in view of the ready availability of the general practitioner and the
extended notion of illness cultivated by doctors, the unhappy person diagnoses
himself as ill and then goes to his GP. But the GP is trained to treat those who are
‘really ill’. This is what those years of white coats and science have prepared him for.
He thinks his time is being wasted and, more significantly, he feels impotent in the
face of the unhappiness being complained of. A 1979 survey showed that a third of all
recently qualified GPs felt that they should not have to deal with their patients’ family
problems. To do something, the doctor commonly prescribes tranquillisers. Almost a
fifth of all prescriptions are for such drugs. Indeed, even the makers of Valium and
Librium, Hoff- mann-La-Roche, hardly famous for public- spiritedness, were
constrained last August to advise doctors in the United States not to prescribe them
for the ordinary stresses of life (whatever that may mean) and similar Department of
Health guidelines were published last March in the British Medical Journal.
So, the GP finds himself playing the part of socialising agent, ensuring that, whether it
be unhappiness or the stress of work, they are kept in check and whatever pain there
is, is not felt, even if this means that the social and economic conditions which give
rise to the unhappiness remain unaddressed. Alternatively, the GP finds himself faced
by those beset by today’s common ills. He is in danger of becoming the victim of his
own hyperbole, in that he is asked to work wonders when there are none to work. The
damage has been done. There are only symptoms to ease, parts to patch. The
frustration is inevitable.

6

Then consider the doctors who work in hospital. If accident units, and perhaps
obstetrics, are put aside, hospitals are now largely engaged in two tasks, neither of
which remotely conforms to the image of modern medicine represented by the
teaching hospital. One task is that of serving as dumping-grounds for the old and socalled mentally ill. The hospital is little more than a hotel or hostel. The frustration of
the doctor trained to see himself not as a carer but as a solver is obvious and it can
only increase as the elderly come to form an even greater proportion of the
population. Indeed, quite whether doctors, as trained at present, have a role to play at
all in such hospitals, or whether others could not do the job just as well, is a question
which presses for an answer
The other task doctors in hospitals are performing is that of calling upon more and
more complex and expensive technology to respond to situations in which, when one
looks at the general overall picture, there is usually little that can be done. To use the
metaphor of the mechanic, the tyre can be patched, but even so it is permanently
weak. I know well that there are some who will say, ‘It’s all very well talking in
general terms, but I’ve got Mr A., who is clamouring for help, or Miss B., whom I
may be able to help. Then there’s old Mrs C.’s hip operation, and Mr D.’s hernia to
fix. I cannot tell them to think of the generality of care, I have a duty to them.’ I
concede much of this, but let me make two points4 I am not advocating we burn down
our hospitals tomorrow. Of course we need our marvellous accident units, our general
medicine and surgery, whether it be for hips or hernias, haemorrhoids or Hodgkin’s
disease. But, even here, I wonder how much more rewarding and beneficial it would
be to prevent, for instance, the de generation of the hip or to have other preventive
measures; for example, a production system which does not give productivity bonuses
or does not use piece-rates in industries in which these are known to be associated
with an increase in work accidents. How much more rewarding these measures would
be than to have units waiting to pick up the pieces and work wonders in sewing the
parts together so that the seams are barely visible. If these preventive strategies were
pursued, greater attention could then be paid to the marvellous developments; for
example, in aiding those with ailing sight or hearing. My second point is that, put
baldly, certain services should not be offered until matters of greater priority are dealt
with. There are perfectly respectable ethical theories which, in the context of harsh
choices, such as those we face now (and always will as regards resources), allow for
con duct which will benefit the larger or more worthy number, even if this inevitably
means the others may suffer. One example was the decision in the Second World War
in North Africa that only those who, on recovery, would be able to fight again should
receive scarce penicillin. Another is the decision now being taken in Uganda to feed
only those starving children who may recover, leaving the rest to die. Our situation is
not so desperate, but the same principle must apply. Indeed, such decisions are made
every day in the National Health Service when resources come to be allocated. As one
writer, a doctor and theologian, argued recently, ‘Only when we are prepared to let
some people die will we be free to make more humane decisions in the distribution of
resources Our fear of death leads us to use death as the final, incontrovertible
argument’. We are prepared to ignore much human misery for the spectacle of saving
a few lives. Not so long ago, a senior civil servant remarked that consultants opposed
to shifts of resources from the well-endowed areas of medicine to the Cinderella areas
of geriatrics and mental illness have not been averse to using ‘shroud-waving tactics’.

7

Well, after these rather harsh words about the wrong emphasis adopted by modern
medicine, the wrong path it has taken, I shall consider next time how the emphasis
should be shifted; what a better path for the future may be.

8

