REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 3: Suffer the Little Children
TRANSMISSION: 19 November 1980 – Radio 4

It is hard to avoid the grave conclusion that the National Health Service has failed us.
Certainly, it has failed to take its opportunities. It must be our task to make it clear to
government and those who manage and control medicine that we are not content to
watch our health care services merely tick over at their present level, far less slowly
disintegrate. There can be and must be improvement.
The provision of health care rests on political and social decisions. The political
values which are supposed to be at the heart of any decisions made for the provision
of health care are well known: that need should be the sole criterion of receipt of
service, and that funds should be raised on the basis of ability to contribute. Though
these values have not been formally rejected as principles, commitment to them has
certainly wavered. Indeed, in practice, the provision of health care has seen a
systematic and widespread departure from them. What I propose to put before you is a
blueprint for action. It represents an attempt to reassert our faith in these principles by
adopting measures which will go a long way towards seeing them become reality.
Before I go on, let me point to the forces which stand against change and
improvement. We have already noticed some of the ways in which modern medicine
has taken the wrong path. With the decline of serious threats to health from infections,
our health care system has turned away from environmental considerations towards
the notion of personal health care. It has become an illness service rather than a health
service. This is not to say that modern health care can do nothing for us—it can and
does provide many much needed services. But, it could do far, far more if a different
balance were struck, a balance which would make it more properly a health service.
The present political climate is a further obstacle to improvement. A time of major
economic difficulties would seem an inappropriate one in which to recommend
improvement in the health services, if only because it is assumed improvements
would cost money. This is, of course, not necessarily so. For instance, money spent in
reducing the number of accidents at work or on the road, is money gained, in terms of
reduced hospital and health care use, in reduced social security payments and
increased economic productivity. What is more, the preoccupation with costs suggests
that money is the only value. That it is important is clear, that it is the only value is
nonsense.
Next, modern medicine has come to recognise that a large measure of modern illness
which is not related to genetic disability is the product of our behaviour and our
environment. The main reasons for chronic illness and death are heart and respiratory
ailments, cancer and strokes, with accidents contributing a large share also. Cigarettesmoking, alcohol consumption, appalling dietary habits, dangerous workplaces and
roads are heavily implicated. Unable to do anything about these conditions,

1

government and medical men have resorted to the apologia that they can’t do
anything till people change. This has been called the syndrome of blaming the victim.
For example, the last resort of those faced with the carnage of lung cancer is to say:
‘We’ve done our best. We’ve shown the link between smoking and cancer of the lung.
It’s just that people won’t stop smoking.’ People are castigated as feckless or
irresponsible. They eat the wrong foods, they drink too much. Pregnant women won’t
use the antenatal services available. People just won’t take care of themselves. This
may appear to let medicine off the hook but what is lost or ignored is the fact that the
victim, the one whose life patterns are responsible for his illness, is a product of his
environment and often can do little to shape or control it. You can only make the right
choices as to food or lifestyle if you have the proper information, if you have the
appropriate health education from an early age and if you have the power or capacity
to implement your choice.
These are some of the obstacles in the way of reshaping and improving our health
care. They are the product of political and economic decisions and circumstances. So,
if there is to be any improvement, it will only come through major political, social and
economic changes.
Let me now put before you what I see as the necessary requirements for a
reorientation of our health care, my blueprint, if you will. First, the mere provision of
more and more money will not of itself improve the quality of our health care.
Unfavourable comparisons have been made between the proportion of Gross
Domestic Product spent in the UK on health care and that spent by the USA or West
Germany. But the Royal Commission on the National Health Service cautions against
using such comparisons as the basis for any sweeping assertions. For example, the
latest available figures show that both West Germany and the USA, despite their
greater expenditure on health care, have a worse record in terms of perinatal and
maternal mortality than England and Wales and no better record in life expectancy.
It is trite to remark that it is not the amount of money but how it is spent which is
significant. If, for example, we continue to think of health care in terms which give
pride of place as regards resources to hospitals, we could easily find ourselves
spending more and more with no great benefit to the overall health of the nation.
Secondly, we must curb our predilection for medicine in the form of ever more
complex technology. Note I do not say abandon it. We must keep it and its advocates,
doctors and commercial entrepreneurs, under control. Hospitals, with their massive
costs, expensive equipment and commitment to technology have elbowed themselves
into the centre of the medical stage, consuming now some 70 per cent of available
resources. The debate concerning the merits of heart transplants offers a useful lesson.
It has been carried on largely by doctors as if what was at stake was a narrow
technical matter instead of a profound question as to the proper direction of our health
care resources. In reality, heart transplants are only an example and because of their
rarity and relative uselessness virtually an irrelevance. There are, after all, 400 deaths
a day from heart disease. The real debate is much wider. It concerns advanced
technology, interventionist, last-ditch, patch- and-repair medicine as against other
measures aimed at reducing the need for such intervention. The debate should not be
in terms of ‘either or’. It must be in terms of how much of each do we need and can
we afford. Quite clearly, we need and have come to rely on medical technology in the
treatment of kidney disease, in aiding the blind and the deaf, in avoiding the birth of

2

deformed and disabled babies, and in many other areas. What we do not need and
must guard against is a mentality which conceives of medical care only, or primarily,
in terms of such technological approaches. Instead, we need to direct more of our
energy and resources towards the promotion of good health. One tragic but often
overlooked feature of the defence of heart transplant surgery is that it is so clearly an
example of the crazy contradictions of our society. We can only transplant hearts if
we have otherwise healthy corpses from which to take them. Where do we get such
corpses? We depend on the appalling death rate from road accidents, much of which
is preventable.
I now pass to the third point in my blueprint for the future shape of medicine. One of
the declared aims of the reorganisation, in 1974, of the National Health Service was
the integration of individual with community care. The result has been less than
successful. Primary care is on the verge of collapse in some areas. Where it functions,
it may not be meeting the real needs of the community. If GPs were more adequately
prepared for the real health needs of their patients, which are as much to do with
social problems as with particular diseases, then the beginnings of a movement
towards better health could emerge. Indeed, the GP could well become an important
focus for the sort of social reform necessary to produce the improvement in health we
claim we desire. No one is better placed to gauge the social pressures and problems of
the day and pass the news on up the line, and no one is better placed to act as an
educator for better health and pass the word down the line.
Besides the primary care by the GP, there is the need for greater emphasis on
community medicine. The reorganisation of the National Health Service, introduced,
as one critic notes, on All Fools’ Day 1974, destroyed the long tradition of the much
valued medical officer of health and launched the newly created community
physicians on uncharted seas; they soon became sucked into administration and are
largely concerned with personal care rather than public health. The result has been
unfilled posts, disenchantment and reluctance of newly qualified doctors to go
anywhere near the job. This same under- staffing and general demoralisation is
reflected in other areas of community health. The school health services are woefully
ill-equipped to engage in the kind of thorough preventive care and health education
which would pay such dividends in the child’s later life. Occupational health is
another example of a missed opportunity. Its aim is to promote health at work and
thereby reduce accidents and injuries. Instead, it stumbles along while accidents at
work kill 650 people a year and an estimated one million are injured and require time
off.
It follows then, and this is my next point, that important as the emphasis on primary
and community care may be, even greater emphasis must be placed by our health
service in the future on two interrelated exercises—the prevention of illness and
accidents and the promotion of health. That the chapter in the Royal Commission’s
report on the National Health Service which dealt with these was the shortest bar one
in the whole report, suggests the process of change may not be easy.
A first essential step in any process towards redirecting effort or reallocating
resources is to see how they are at present distributed. It is no rhetorical device to
‘describe the disparities in the present provision of health care among the various
groups in our society as a scandal. The evidence has been available for a long time.

3

‘Inequalities in Health’, the 1980 report compiled by a group under the chairmanship
of Sir Douglas Black, is the latest and most impressive account to appear. In the dry
language of such reports, the group found ‘marked inequalities in health between the
social classes in Britain’. At birth and in the first month of life, the death rate of
babies born to parents in social class five, the unskilled, is double that of babies born
to parents in social class one, professional workers. In the next 11 months, four times
as many boys and five times as many girls in class five die as in class one. Compared
with class one, men in class five have twice the rate of long-standing illness, women
in class five two and a half times the rate. Indeed, if a line were drawn from the Wash
to the Bristol Channel, those living north of the line, the large majority of whom are
members of classes four and five, have on average a shorter lifespan, higher mortality
rates and higher disease rates than those south of the line. The 1979 report of the
Royal Commission on the National Health Service noted bleakly that, in terms of
health, ‘the position of those in social classes four and five appears to have worsened
relative to those in social classes one and two since the inception of the National
Health Service in 1948’. This makes the almost contemptuous dismissal of Sir
Douglas Black’s report by the present Secretary of State hard to understand. The
Secretary of State admits ‘disappointment’ that there is generally little sign of health
inequalities diminishing. ‘But,’ he goes on, ‘additional expenditure, on the scale
which could result from the recommendations of this report could be upwards of two
billion Pounds a year.’ This, he concludes, is quite unrealistic. The cost point is not
argued nor, it seems, is any account taken of possible short- or long-term savings and
benefits which would accrue to a country whose people are healthier. And no account
is taken of values other than monetary ones, the most obvious being the sheer
injustice of operating a system which fails to meet its stated aim, the provision of
health care with equality of entitlement and access.
So, change and improvement are hardly around the corner. But this doesn’t deter me
from offering my views. And, if political action is called for, political education is a
first and necessary stage. So, let us consider some specific aspects of this part of my
blueprint, the need to emphasise the prevention of accidents and illness and the
promotion of health. One argument put forward by those anxious to maintain the
existing emphasis on interventionist medicine is that you cannot prevent illness or
promote health until you know what causes illness or ill-health. And to discover
causes you need the sort of medicine practised now, backed by technology and
research. There is, of course, some truth in this. The argument goes on that we simply
do not yet know what causes the common illnesses which afflict and kill us, with
perhaps the exceptions of smoking and its relationship with lung cancer, and alcohol
with liver damage. The implication is that, until we do, medicine should continue in
its present form. Consider the fact that, in the United States, mortality from heart
disease has declined in recent years concurrently with an increase in exercise and a
great reduction in smoking. Yet arguments about the role played by eating fat, or
exercising, or smoking, in heart disease still continue. Indeed, if we are to wait until
the perfect controlled experiment has demonstrated that it is factor X which is the real
killer, preventive medicine will have to await the millennium. Besides, it must be
obvious by now that research aimed at isolating individual causative agents is of
doubtful validity, since there are few modern afflictions which can be traced to one
particular cause. There are, after all, good historical precedents for taking action to
prevent illness without the ability to justify the action scientifically. When, in 1853,
John Snow removed the handle of the Broad Street water-pump in Soho, he could not

4

prove the link between the water and cholera. Equally, we can now observe that
people who are obese seem more prone to illness, and most of us know what makes us
fat. Indeed, insurance underwriters, those most hard-headed of people, follow a
simple rule: the more overweight you are, the higher the premium they demand from
you. They do not wait for definitive, scientific proof. So, while I concede the value of
some modern interventionist medicine in terms of the information it may offer, this
does not persuade me that it must be supported in all its various forms nor that
preventive care must necessarily play second fiddle to it.
Next, to establish the basis for the promotion and pursuit of health as well as the
prevention of illness, there must be a commitment to education. We need, quite
simply, to learn how to live healthy lives or, even more fundamentally, to have the
opportunity to learn. Such education has two roles. It must combat what have been
called the multi-million pound anti-health forces, the tobacco, alcohol and food
industries and their advertisers, who bombard us with misinformation. And there is
positive education, which must begin in schools and be carried on in office,
workplace and in the home. The government-established Health Education Council
commands the pathetically puny sum of three million pounds a year in pursuit of a
task which is central to health care. For example, it must try to educate us about the
dangers of cigarette-smoking on half a million pounds a year while the tobacco
industry spends £70 million extolling the pleasures of smoking. Public education can,
of course, come through the medium of the press, radio and television. Consider how
much attention is given by these to strikes, and even threats of strikes, as imperilling
our national wellbeing through lost working-days. I am certainly not saying this
shouldn’t be reported and I concede that strikes can have drastic effects. Over the last
decade, an average of 13 million working-days have been lost each year through
strikes. But where is the headline and leader column, and newsflash and interview
concerning tooth decay, which accounts for an average of four million lost workingdays a year and is entirely preventable? Where is the special report on the causes of
back pain, which account for about 18 million lost working-days a year, and could be
greatly reduced through proper education?’ And where is the outcry in the press
against injuries at work, which account for an estimated 48 million lost working-days
a year? Is it too much to hope that there will be some rethinking in Fleet Street as to
what is really the English disease?
My third specific point is that any concern for preventive care or the promotion of
health must include a strategy for confronting the threat posed by the major destroyers
of our day. These are, of course, cigarettes, alcohol, poor diet and accidents (whether
at home, on the roads or at work) and here, I am not talking about education
concerning these threats but, rather, about the need to take some action. We simply
have to do better than we have done, so far, in controlling these scourges. Everyone
knows about the threats posed by alcohol and cigarettes. The case is well documented.
But take, for example, our diet. The food industry has been enormously successful in
ruining our diet and, consequently, our health. For example, more and more food is
made from raw materials which have been refined. Look at bread. The ordinary loaf
of white bread is not lacking in nutrition. What it lacks is bulk. This lack encourages
over-consumption. Over-consumption sells more bread and so produces greater
profits. It also produces obesity and the consequent threat to health. And the story has
a twist in the tail. The food industry has gone on to develop a second string to its bow:
the sale of health foods and vitamin tablets. To make up for what has been removed

5

from some food by its being processed and refined, vitamins and health foods, which
are, of course, more expensive than ordinary food, then appear on the market. Thus,
the wealthier can get the food they need, since they can afford to buy it. The poor
cannot, and another inroad into health promotion and the prevention of illness is
made.
As regard accidents, in addition to the 650 killed at work each year, there are a further
six and a half thousand deaths from accidents in the home and at play. A hundred
miners each week suffer disabling injuries, yet the occupational health service
continues to be neglected. Despite about 75,000 people being injured and 7,500 killed
on our roads, only a third of drivers wear safety belts. Furthermore, in the case of
children in cars, it is estimated that 85 per cent of the deaths and 70 per cent of the
injuries would have been prevented if the child had been restrained. Yet, opposition to
the compulsory wearing of seat-belts still appears to be winning the day.
Of course, it is fair to note that there are those who, when faced with the prospect of
seat-belt legislation or increased taxes on cigarettes or alcohol, will argue that there is
a limit to the extent to which government should—not can—interfere in the life of the
individual. When Chadwick, the pioneer of public health legislation, had his
legislation defeated in 1854 and disappeared from public life, The Times blundered:
‘We prefer to take our chance with cholera, than to be bullied into health.’ There is
much that is cant and unreason in such calls for individual freedom, even though there
is also a perfectly respectable philosophical argument. For, in today’s 6ociety, there is
little an individual can do which does not impinge on others. The smoker, for
example, draws sickness pay, receives medical care and dies in hospital, all funded
from public revenue. When he can’t work he and his dependants are supported from
public funds.
Let us consider next two other threats to health, often overlooked. They are
unemployment and the level of subsistence available to those who must rely on social
security benefits. Unemployment has, of course, a number of devastating effects, not
least the loss of a sense of worth and consequent desperation or frustration.
Unemployment also threatens health in the sense that family income and consequent
levels of nutrition, quality of housing and recreation are affected adversely. Harvey
Brenner, in a now famous study at Johns Hopkins University, in the USA, has shown
that the increase in US unemployment between 1970 and 1975 of one and a quarter
million people was responsible for an extra 26,000 deaths from heart and kidney
disease, 5,500 extra admissions to mental hospitals, 1,700 extra homicides, 1,500
extra suicides and 900 extra deaths from cirrhosis, through excessive consumption of
alcohol. Studies in Australia and here in the UK bear out his thesis. Such arguments
lend a cutting-edge to polite political debate about the regrettable level of
unemployment. Equally, those who live on social security benefits constantly teeter
on the brink of ill-health. Already, many of the elderly and disabled live in a state of
relative poverty. Limit the resources available to them and the risks grow.
Of all the various proposals for the promotion of health and the prevention of illness, I
have left the most important until last. I refer to the health of our children. If we are to
improve the health of the nation we have no choice but to redirect an enormous
amount of our resources to the care of children, before birth, at birth, and during their
development. If ever there was a case for the promotion of health, this must be it. This

6

is one of the declared priorities of the NHS, but little yet has been achieved. Indeed,
the results are disgraceful. Once again it has to be realised that what is needed is not
just tinkering with or retooling the NHS, for, at best, the result would be cosmetic.
What is called for is the realisation that the state of our children’s health and,
consequently, their and our future, is a product of the whole style of our society, and
that if anything is to be done, then some fairly profound political action is called for.
It is a measured understatement to say that, as a society, we could do more for the
health of our children. The problem, of course, is not new. Half the young men who
volunteered for the Boer War were turned away as unfit. Our perinatal mortality and
morbidity in the UK, the death and sickness rates of babies in the first week of life,
compare unfavourably with most other countries of similar economic and social
development. And who are the children who are suffering? Let me remind you of the
words of Sir Douglas Black’s report, ‘Inequalities in Health’. ‘From the end of the
first month to the end of the first year, for the death of every one male infant in class
one we can expect four deaths in class five.’ Among female infants the ratio is even
more disadvantageous to the offspring of manual workers. Antenatal and perinatal
care simply are not being delivered to those most in need, those in social classes four
and five. Women in these groups go to clinics later in pregnancy, go less regularly,
fail to follow advice as punctiliously, and often continue to smoke. It is the children of
the same families who are no longer immunised against the common infections. Large
numbers of parents have, for example, been frightened off by the well- meaning but
ill-advised campaign against whooping-cough vaccination. It is these same children in
social classes four and five who do not receive adequate testing for hearing and sight
and whose prospects for educational and emotional development, never the brightest,
are handicapped still further. It Is these same children whose nutrition and health are
most affected by political decisions made in the name of economy: to raise the price
of school meals or abandon the service; to curtail the supply of free school milk; to
reduce a whole range of social security benefits, whether supplementary benefits or
child benefits, or even allowances for children’s clothing and shoes; to limit access to
free school transport or even dispense with the services and safety afforded by those
guardians of the road crossings, the lollipop ladies. About 5,000 children are killed or
injured each year while crossing the road, giving Britain the worst child pedestrian
injury rate in Western Europe. It is these same children who must live in substandard
housing. It is these same children who provide the squalid statistic that 97 per cent of
them, by the age of 15, will have rotting teeth. It is these same children who feel the
cold wind of unemployment blowing through their parents’ lives. It is these same
children who will suffer from a mortality rate from accidents five times higher than
that of children born into class one.
These inequalities, or iniquities, cannot be shrugged off, yet successive governments
seem oblivious to them. The extent of the re-examination and reorientation of values
called for is breathtaking. But so also is the extent of the human wastage and misery
which we tolerate now with hardly a thought as to whether things might be otherwise.
By contrast to the magnitude of this task, the squabbling over private medicine which
seems to mesmerise politicians and doctors is a tragic irrelevance. The Black report
concluded with the words ‘the abolition of child poverty should be adopted as a
national goal for the 1980s’. You will recall the present Secretary of State’s
thoroughly anaemic comment that the findings of the Black report on ‘Inequalities in
Health’ would come as a disappointment to many. They are a disgrace, an indictment

7

of what we are and what we have achieved. Disraeli spoke of our being two nations.
We still have not escaped this indictment. Now let those who want to argue about
heart transplants do so. It is against this background that the debate must be judged.
I have sought to sketch the outline of a programme to ensure our health care. Mine is
a conceptual framework, not a plan of action. Of course, it calls for action. If we are
to change the way in which medicine is thought of and practised, it is we who must
take that action. It is our responsibility.

8

