REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 1: The Rhetoric of Medicine
TRANSMISSION: 5 November 1980 – Radio 4

Six years ago the American Psychiatric Association took a vote and decided
homosexuality was not an illness. So, since 1974 it hasn’t been an illness. How
extraordinary, you may think, to decide what illness is, by taking a vote. What exactly
is going on here?
I’ve set as my task the unmasking of medicine. It isn’t that I think there’s something
sinister behind the mask. But I do detect a sense of curiosity, of concern, if not
disquiet. The practice of medicine has changed. There’s a feeling abroad that all may
not be well. This feeling grows out of a sense of distance, out of a sense that medicine
is in the hands of experts and sets its own path. We can take it or leave it. Heart
transplants, the definition of death, the treatment of the dying, the sad fate of Karen
Quinlan, the selective treatment of handicapped newly-born babies, the treatment of
the mentally ill; there’s a long list of issues which are deeply troubling but which
seem effectively to be kept under wraps. One of the most successful ways of doing
this is by making the issues and problems appear to be medical, technical ones, not
really for the rest of us at all. This can be accomplished by the simple device of
translating the issue into medical language. I don’t mean by this translating it into the
technical terms we associate with medicine, but embracing it within the conceptual
framework of medicine. The first step on the way to understanding modern medicine,
looking behind the mask, is to unravel the rhetoric of medicine.
Let me begin with the word ‘illness’. It is, you say, a word you understand. You know
what it means and it will take more than one curious example about the activities of
the American Psychiatric Association to persuade you otherwise. ‘Illness’, you insist,
is a technical term, a term of scientific exactitude. Whether someone has an illness, is
ill, is a matter of objective fact
But homosexuality is as much a part of social life after 1974 as it was before. The
objective facts haven’t changed. What has changed is how the particular doctors
choose to judge it. This suggests the strangely disquieting insight that illness involves
not merely the existence of certain facts; it involves a judgment on those facts. And it
is doctors who do the judging. A choice exists whether to categorise particular
circumstances as amounting to an illness. Power is vested in the doctor, and the power
is not insignificant.
It becomes important, then, to discover whether there are boundaries to this word, this
concept ‘illness’. Can it be applied willy-nilly on the say-so of the doctor, or are there
limits to his power? To analyse the word ‘illness’ is to explore the role of the doctor
in modern medicine. It is to discover that medical practice is, above all, a political
enterprise, one in which judgments about people are made.

1

But, you ask, are there not many conditions about which we’d all agree that they
constitute illnesses? Of course, the answer is yes, there are. Obviously we’d all agree
that someone with an inflamed appendix is ill, as is someone who cannot breathe very
well, even when resting. Equally, we agree that someone with, say, leprosy or cancer
is ill. Why do we all agree? It’s obvious, you say. Someone with an inflamed
appendix is ill. He’s got appendicitis. But this is a circular argument. We have to go
more carefully. What we have are certain facts about the physical condition of a
person. We all agree that these are illnesses because we accept two propositions. The
first is that there is a normal state in which the appendix is not inflamed, and
breathing is easy while resting. Secondly, it is appropriate to judge someone who
deviates from this norm as ill. Only if we examine both of these will we understand
what is involved in the meaning of the word ‘illness ‘,
Take the first of the two propositions, that there must be a deviation from the normal
state. This seems simple enough. It isn’t, of course. For a start, it’s only our
convention to call such deviations illness. Others in other cultures may view such
conditions entirely differently. They may see them as visitations from the gods, as
punishments deserved and to be accepted, or as possession by spirits. We cleave to
science and the scientific principle of a demonstrable state of normality and a
causative agent which brings about an abnormality. Few would object to this
convention. Even so, we still have a problem. What is the state we should regard as
normal?
A common method of answering this is to have recourse to an analogy drawn from
engineering. We think in terms of a machine which has a design, which is the norm
and which malfunctions when it does not perform according to the design. Indeed, in
common speech we may describe our car as sick, or ill, or on its last legs. And, by and
large, this analogy serves us well. But it has its shortcomings. One weakness is that it
is crude. We like to think of ourselves as more than machines. We have emotions,
moods and, feelings which affect profoundly our physical state. A further weakness is
that we may not all agree on the design, the blueprint, against which to measure our
performance or our state. For example, women have the capacity to bear children. In
the old days, it was considered part of the design for women that they bore children. A
woman who did not bear children departed from this design. She was to that extent
abnormal. She was described as barren, a term with connotations of illness as well as
some notion of moral judgment upon her; you’ll recall that Julius Caesar urged his
wife to touch Antony so as to be cured of her barrenness. To some extent we have
changed our view of the design for women. There is probably less inclination now to
ascribe to childless women a term suggesting illness or moral judgment.
The point is clear. What is the normal state against which to measure abnormality is a
product of social and cultural values and expectations. it is not some static,
objectively identifiable fact. As views and values change, so the norm will change.
So, if illness has as its first criterion some deviation from the norm, some
abnormality, it too will vary and change in its meaning.
Furthermore, I suggested a moment ago that there is a relationship between calling
someone ill and making a moral judgment about him. The same abnormality can at
different times be illness or evil. When we describe someone as ill, we often say,
there’s something wrong with him, and the word ‘wrong’ can also imply lack of

2

moral worth. Before the days of modern medicine it was common to regard conditions
we now regard as illnesses as being attributable to possession by evil spirits. For
example, some of those accused of witchcraft by Cotton Mather in 17th-century
Massachusetts would probably now be described as epileptics, or as suffering from
Huntington’s chorea, and seen as ill and certainly not as evil. On the other hand, we
fluctuate now in our view as t1 whether, for example, the alcoholic or the drug-taker
is ill or bad.
Running through such examples is the theme of responsibility. As our views of each
person’s power to exercise dominion over his life change, so will our concept of the
borders between illness and evil. For evil is seen as a product of someone’s choice
and thus something he may be held responsible for. Illness, by contrast, is something
which overtakes him, and, once ill, he is absolved from the ordinary responsibilities of
everyday life
So illness, a central concept of medicine, is not a matter of objective scientific fact.
Instead, it’s a term used to describe deviation from a notional norm. So a choice exists
whether to call someone ill. The choice depends upon the norm chosen, and this is a
matter of social and political judgment. Ordinarily, there will be widespread
agreement about what objective facts, what physical states are appropriately described
as abnormal. But this does not’ belie the fact that there is an inherent vagueness in the
term ‘illness’. And this is only the beginning. Even when it has been decided that the
physical conditions warrant the description ‘abnormal’, there is still the second step.
They have to be judged to be an illness. An evaluation has to take place.

This should cause us to pause. Who does the evaluating? What are the values
involved? Does this mean that the vagueness we previously noticed is compounded?
Does this mean that the concept of illness can be manipulated, that it has no clear and
certain boundaries? We began with the cosy assumption that ‘illness’ was a
descriptive term, applied to a set of objective facts. It appears now that illness is an
indeterminate concept, the product of social, political and moral values which, as we
have seen, fluctuate. The implications of this will strike you immediately. If ‘illness’
is a judgment, the practice of medicine can be understood in terms of power. He who
makes the judgment wields the power.
Let me explain the implications of this. The treatment of illness is for doctors. A
social institution has grown up defined and managed by doctors, the role of which is
to persuade us that our preoccupations must be related to them, and them alone (since
they alone have competence). However willing we may be, and however wellintentioned the doctor, it’s hard to overstate the power which this vests in the doctor.
It is hard to overstate how such a social arrangement may undermine the
Inotion of individual responsibility and, of course, ultimately, individual liberty
Michel Foucault, a contemporary French philosopher, captures the point perfectly
when he argues: ‘In the modern world all too often there is no clear line between
concern for the welfare of others and coercive control of their lives. A new kind of
power relationship has arisen in society Authorities who understand our bodies have
gained the right to make and enforce rules about morality.’ The nature of the power
relationship is seen in terms of confession, now to medical rather than priestly
‘authorities’. ‘The person who confesses supplies the raw data; the confessor supplies

3

the meaning,’ Foucault asserts. Interpretation, and with it judgment and prescription,
become the preserve of authority, since, knowing what we do not know about
ourselves, doctors acquire the right to show us how to behave.
Let me take this further. Just because illness is associated with objective facts, it
appears that illness is those facts, that illness is a thing. But, as we’ve seen, illness
isn’t a thing; it’s a judgmental term. Being ill is not a state; it’s a status, to be granted
or withheld by those who have the power to do so. Status connotes a particular
position in society, assumed only after satisfying others that certain conditions have
been observed.
Let me explain. Consider Mr Smith. He works on an assembly line. He finds the work
dull and tedious. One day, he decides he has had enough and would like just a few
days at home. He presents himself to his doctor and asks for a sick note, excusing him
from work. Let’s analyse this process carefully.
The first stage is the understanding by Smith that he needs authoritative affirmation
that he is ill. He may decide he’s ill; indeed, it is a feature of modern medicine that,
outside emergencies, it is the individual who makes the first decision concerning
illness. He stakes a claim to illness. But his decision is not enough. The monopoly
power to confirm or deny the presence of illness rests with the doctor. Notice I used
the word ‘power’, not ‘skill’, since it is more than a technical skill. It is, from what
I’ve already said, a social and political power.
The doctor may say, ‘Yes, Mr Smith, you ought to have a few days off’, and then add
a diagnostic tag such as ‘stress’ or ‘overwork’ (‘overwork’ being clearly an evaluative
term). Smith then gets his sick note. Or the doctor may say, ‘There’s nothing the
matter with you, Smith.’ His notes may read: ‘Another malingerer! What process is
involved here? What sort of term is ‘malingering’? It involves a judgment that Smith
ought to be working and that the doctor is not going to aid him in avoiding this
responsibility. Another doctor could just as well decide otherwise.
Besides showing the power the doctor has to manipulate the concept of illness
according to his (the doctor’s) or the general population’s view of what is socially or
politically proper, several other points emerge from this example. One is that a major
use of the term ‘illness’ is in a functional sense. Is the person able to function in the
role he has? Consider the power this gives the doctor. He may have no idea of what
life on an assembly line is like, yet he has the power to decide whether Smith should
get back to it or not. It also suggests that the function most clearly involved in the
notion of illness is the capacity to work, at least as regards adult males. Health comes
to be defined as the ability to work. The doctor reflects and enforces the values of the
day: productivity is expected of labour, rest is a reward to be earned.
I choose the example of the sickness certificate for Mr Smith, not because it suits my
purpose, but because it is so common and so clear. The inescapable conclusion exists
that ‘illness’ is a spurious scientific term and that the doctor, hi purporting to
determine its existence as an objective fact, is engaged in a series of moral, social and
political choices which we permit him to make. Of course, many doctors find the
position they are in most unsavoury. Frequent protests led the Department of Health
to change the form of the sickness note in 1976. But the basic system remained, and

4

with it the power. The doctor is engaged in a process of socialisation, of ensuring that
the prevailing social and political attitudes and values are reinforced and are adhered
to by those who, by their behaviour, may be seen as potential deviants.
If you remain unconvinced of the view I am advancing, let’s consider Mrs Jones.
Married at 19, she is now 35. She stays at home all day, while her husband is at work
and their children are at school. She has grown to dread and despise the tedium of her
life. She finds her husband boring. She feels trapped. She has ambivalent emotions
towards her children. Life, she feels, is passing her by. She finds herself crying most
days.
She decides to visit her doctor. She has diagnosed herself as needing help and has
chosen the doctor, in the absence of other obvious candidates, as the appropriate
provider. She may not think of herself as ill. Indeed, in previous times she may have
consulted her priest. Her doctor tells her that she is depressed, something she already
knew. The doctor can then confer on her the status of ‘ill’, if he so chooses, by
offering to treat her through the use of his medical expertise. He will provide
tranquilisers. More than two-thirds of all prescriptions for such drugs are for women
rather than men. It may be no coincidence that women appear 15 times more
frequently than men in advertisements for mood-changing drugs.
What does this commerce between the two of them signify? The doctor is prepared to
use the flexible term ‘illness’ to embrace Mrs Jones’s condition. By so doing, he
endows himself with power over her and satisfies his own and her desire that
something be done. A further implication is that he affirms that Mrs Jones is ill,
because isn’t he treating her? He affirms that her condition is abnormal and that
medical intervention is therefore warranted to bring her back to normal. Other women
cope. Coping is good. Coping is the norm.
But Mrs Jones’s complaint is her dissatisfaction with a social and economic order
which robs her of independence and ties her to her home. The doctor can’t change the
economic and social order, but, with drugs, he can stop her worrying about it. So
that’s what he does. He returns her to the ranks of unhappy women who no longer feel
the pain. By so doing, of course, he prevents the rancour she feels from being
expressed in political or social terms. The social and economic status quo is
maintained, through the agency of the doctor. He becomes, once again, an agent of the
prevailing social system, ensuring that its values persist.
This is not to say that the doctor’s role is sinister or conspiratorial. In some large part
the doctor acts as a socialiser quite unwittingly. His education has trained him to see
illness and to try to ease pain, even if by so doing he merely drives the cork deeper
into the bottle, so making uncorking that much more explosive. The doctor is not, of
course, wholly innocent, though he may be disquieted. He knows what he’s doing. He
must resort to such defences as: ‘Should I just let her go on being unhappy? That
would be too cruel.’ It’s a hard question to decide which course is the more cruel.
Only the other day, a Liverpool doctor, many of whose patients are now unemployed,
described on the radio how they came to him for ‘a Vali’, a Valium tablet. He said he
really didn’t know what to do. He couldn’t give them a job. They were clearly
depressed, yet he was reluctant to prescribe drugs for something he saw as a political
ill.

5

Of course, we, the public, have connived at this exercise of power by the doctor, out
of ignorance, or trust, or even out of choice. We may well seek sometimes the
childlike irresponsibility which the doctor may endow upon us through the diagnosis
of illness. There’s nothing like being ill occasionally. You are waited on hand and
foot, excused from responsibility, indulged and pampered. Victorian ladies avoided
all sorts of crises by an attack of vapours, and a headache has been a godsend to many
an embattled female. We have opted for what Illich has called the medicalisation of
life, the conversion of social and political ills into illnesses, and doctors have not been
unwilling to take up the task.
Some of you may say I’ve given an exaggerated account, that there’s a lack of balance
here. Well, the two examples I’ve offered, so far from being unusual, are among the
most common encounters between doctors and patients. I’m not saying that we should
abandon the use of the word ‘illness’. I’m merely urging that we understand what it
involves. Since the diagnosis of illness always calls for a judgment, it is right for all of
us to consider when it is properly to be applied and who should apply it. We should
consider what limits may properly be placed by us on the power of doctors to
manipulate the concept. I’m not suggesting we take a vote. But we must make it our
business to ensure that the judgments arrived at reflect the considered views of all of
us. Each diagnosis is an ethical decision.
So far I have concentrated on the term ‘illness’. Let me now consider the concept of
health. ‘Health’, if it is to have any useful meaning, must refer to more than the mere
absence of illness. It must have a positive quality. It must refer to all those factors
which combine to represent man’s aspirations and expectations. But, if expressed in
this way, again you see at once that here is no term of nice exactitude. It is, in short,
an evaluative term, redolent with moral, spiritual, political and social overtones, and
by no means limited to bodily functioning. This is captured in the World Health
Organisation’s definition of health as ‘not the mere absence of disease, but total
physical, mental and social well-being’.
This definition, so far from serving as a blueprint for planning and policy, whether for
governments or doctors, is customarily held up for ridicule. Among those who
ridicule it are doctors. ‘What’s the use of this sort of airy-fairy thinking?’ the
argument goes. ‘We can’t do anything about these things. We’ve got enough on our
hands dealing with the illness about us. We can’t make people richer or more
comfortable, or whatever “total well-being” means.’
But let’s consider this ridicule for a moment. To embrace a notion of health which
calls for positive political action and the creation of appropriate economic and social
conditions is to concede that health is fundamentally a political term. This most
doctors are unwilling to do. They see themselves and want to be seen as scientists, not
as the political and social agents I have suggested they often are. And to adopt this
approach would be to call for some movement away from investing the great part of
our resources in attempting to remedy existing illnesses (a never-ending exercise),
towards the principle of preventing, checking or controlling, through social and
political action, many of the conditions which give rise to illness.

6

Very many of the people to whom we are readily prepared to ascribe the status ‘ill’
find themselves ill because they are poor, grow up in bad housing, eat poor food,
work, if at all, at depressing jobs, and generally exist on the margin of survival. The
doctor, because of the way medicine has developed, sees himself as powerless in
these matters, except as a voting citizen along with everyone else. And his
professional vote goes to retaining a notion of health tied to illness, because here he is
all-powerful.
The doctor is the entrepreneur of illness. Quite contrary to the view of Sir James
Bryce, that medicine is the only profession that labours incessantly to destroy the
reason for its own existence, the opposite is true. We have abdicated to doctors the
power to define health, with the result that it is predominantly defined in terms of
illness and disease. And as long as it is accepted that health is the exclusive preserve
of doctors, something only they have competence in, this state of affairs will continue.
it is a matter of balance; the power now is with the professional. Only when it is
realised that health is far too important to be left entirely to doctors, that it is a matter
for all of us, will conditions be created for the necessary redirection of effort and
resources. Only then will any real movement towards health be achieved.
Let me end my examination of the rhetoric of medicine by considering the word
‘disease’. In doing so, I’ll be changing tack somewhat. The notion of disease has less
significance in terms of its judgmental quality and the consequent invitation to the
exercise of power. It does, however, offer further insight into how the practice of
medicine is conceived of. Disease has become a central concept of medicine. It has
brought in its wake a number of unfortunate consequences.
Let me explain. If illness involves, at least in part, an abnormal condition, then this
abnormality is thought of in terms of disease. Immediately you will notice the danger,
at least intellectually, of this approach. We’ve seen that illness is not a thing, but a
judgment. None the 1es, preoccupation with disease has meant that we have misled
ourselves into thinking of illness in essentialist terms, as having a specific essence, of
being a thing. Illness becomes the occupation (or possession) of the body by an entity
called a disease, caused by some particular agent. You’ll notice an earlier religious
precursor of this approach, the possession of the body by spirits, a view which still
prevails in certain parts of the world. There is a further impeccable pedigree in the
case of Pandora, sent as a punishment by Zeus, complete with her box containing, as
Robert Graves puts it, ‘all the spites that might plague mankind’.
The great spites, or plagues, of the previous centuries, which brought illness and
death, were infections, such as cholera, TB or diphtheria. These are memories now, at
least in the United Kingdom and other rich industrialised countries. Contrary to
popular view, it was not modern medicine which caused them to disappear. Their
disappearance was due to three factors: improved housing and sanitation, improved
nutrition and improved methods of birth control. By the time that prophylactic
measures were available against them, these infections had, in fact, all but
disappeared as major threats, at least in terms of bringing widespread death or serious
disablement. This is not to overlook the enormous value of vaccination and
immunisation in ensuring that pockets of infection do not break out from time to time.
There is no doubt that disappearance of the threat from the major infections has been

7

a magnificent boon. But in terms of the development of modern medicine, it has had
two unfortunate consequences.
The first is that the elimination of the major infections has served as the basic
evidence—the star witness, if you will—of the triumph of modern medicine over
illness. Of course, when examined calmly, the basis of the claim is suspect. Just as
infections in the 19th century were not conquered by medicine, so much of today’s
illness seems curiously resistant to medical attention. None the less, it is thought
churlish, if not downright treasonous, to doubt the story or to ask too many questions.
The other unfortunate consequence of the elimination of major infections is that it has
provided the intellectual basis for the development and refinement of the notion of
disease, as it is now understood. What we now think of as disease is some specific
entity, which is caused by an attack on or invasion of a part or parts of the body, or by
some malfunction of a part, so as to produce circumstances in which someone
complains of feeling ill. The idea has grown up of a one-to-one relationship between
disease and its causative agent.
The impact of scientific thinking has provided the ideal climate for this development.
The earlier Hippocratic tradition of concern for the whole person in his environment,
which had its practical worth in guaranteeing that Greek colonies were established in
healthy places, has been ousted by the view that illness is a mechanical failure. Like
the machine, the body has functioning parts, each of which, with proper taxonomical
skills—skills in classifying—has to be listed and its function explained. And just as
the machine will not run for long if a fan belt breaks or a gear cog is stripped, so your
body will not function properly if, for example, your kidneys malfunction or are
attacked. Humans have been reduced, through the application of impeccable scientific
skills, to ambulatory assemblages of parts. Just as medical scientists have identified
and tagged the parts of the body, they have persuaded themselves that they can
identify and tag those things called diseases. We have witnessed a great flowering in
taxonomy whereby genus, species and subspecies of disease have been set down.
Two observations are in order. First, intellectually satisfying as it may be to develop
this taxonomy, it is of little use unless it leads to our being able to do anything. Often
medical care begins and ends with diagnosis. Second, and far more serious, disease
theory has led to an attitude whereby the malady is seen as somehow separate from
the sufferer. The disease is what has to be treated, not the person.
But we are more than a set of functioning parts. To regard us as such, as machines, is
to overlook the great complexity of each of us. It overlooks the subtle
interdependence and interrelationship of the parts which make up the whole. What is
wrong with the concept of disease is not that there is no malfunctioning part —there
may be. Rather, it’s that medicine has come to concentrate on it to the exclusion of all
else. Disease theory has induced a sort of medical tunnel vision. What is not seen, as
one writer puts it, is the sick person in all his wholeness and variability. Furthermore,
it is clearly bad science to conceive of illness in terms of specific diseases caused by
specific agents. Not everyone in the last century suffered from TB, though all were
doubtless exposed to the bacillus. Nutrition, fatigue and other environmental factors
were as important in converting something harmless to some into something deadly to

8

many. In Ecuador, for example, the World Bank reports that measles has a mortality
rate 247 times higher than in the USA.
But this approach to illness, through the identification of specific diseases, is fully in
keeping with the application of a sort of primitive scientism to the practice of
medicine, as well as reflecting a long intellectual heritage of the notion of possession.
Furthermore, it receives constant reinforcement from two principal sources. It is
socially and intellectually gratifying for doctors to think of themselves and be thought
of as scientists. It. connotes working in the realm of knowledge and truth, light years
away from the barber and the bleeder of the past. It carries a desirable social cachet.
The other source of reinforcement for the notion of disease comes from those who
have a vested interest in the continued vitality of the notion of specific disease
entities. I think particularly of the pharmaceutical industry.
The relation between the manufacturers of pharmaceutical products and medical
education warrants careful attention. In the middle of the 19th century it was
discovered that by-products of coal and, later, petroleum refinement could be used to
manufacture synthetic dyes, chemicals and drugs. Production of pharmaceutical
products grew in conjunction with the development f the petroleum and petrochemical
industry. If doctors could be persuaded to reorient medicine towards the notion of
pharmacotherapy, then, clearly, here were riches indeed.
The process has been enormously successful, such that modern medicine is almost
totally preoccupied with disease identification and disease-specific response;
symptom-swatting, as one writer has put it. This is not to say, of course, that all
pharmacological intervention is misconceived. That would be stupid in the light of
such magnificent developments as the sulphonamides and the antibiotics. It is to say
that it has helped to produce or reinforce an attitude to illness which is wrong- headed
in several ways.
By concentrating on disease, a form of medicine has developed which, besides being
mechanical, is conceived of as a rescue or repair service. But illness, feeling ifi and
wanting assistance, implies a process far more complicated and subtle than the
metaphorical replacement of a fan belt.
By thinking of illness in terms of disease, we have been led to believe that diagnosis
leads to cure. This, sadly, is far from accurate. There is little to be gained from
labelling if not much can be done once the label has been arrived at. And, of course,
the history of modern medicine in general overall terms is that, just as it was not
responsible for the elimination of infections in the 19th and early 20th century, so it
has had very little impact on the death rate since then. It has had considerable impact
on the sickness rate from certain ills, but only limited success in the case of others,
particularly those which are the most common among us, such as tooth decay,
digestive disorders, skeletal and muscular disabilities, the common cold, heart
ailments, coughs and bronchitis, accidents at work and home, stress, pain and
unhappiness.
But the myth persists. The whirligig of disease identification goes round and no one
seems anxious to stop it or get off. I do not say we should not use the word ‘disease’
—I merely urge that we understand the dangers implicit in its use.

9

I have examined three of the central concepts of modern medicine. You have seen
some of the implications they hold. They imply judgment and evaluations. If we are to
take back power to control our lives, we can and must examine these judgments and
evaluations. We must notice how they are applied. We must be sure they conform to
our sense of what is right or appropriate. We must become the masters of medicine,
not its servants. Let there be no misunderstanding: in the politics of medicine• it is we
who must have the power, we who must set the policies. Educating ourselves in the
language of medicine is the first step. Our next step is to look at the way modern
medicine has developed. I shall suggest next week how in many respects it has taken
the wrong road.

10

