REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 6: Let's Kill All the Lawyers
TRANSMISSION: 10 December 1980 – Radio 4

I have chosen to take as the topic of my last lecture the doctrine of consumerism.
Consumerism is a form of social engineering. In the hands of government,
administrative agencies and courts it can be made to serve the perceived needs of the
day, to protect and promote the interests of the consumer, our interests.
In the practice of medicine the consumer is the patient. His interests, which
consumerism would seek to assert, are those of self-determination and the power to
participate responsibly in decisions made about his life. The challenge to that power
comes from the doctor, who, in the exercise of his professional role, threatens to
infantilise his patient, to undermine his power of self- determination, to act in a
paternalistic manner. Consumerism has a role to play in establishing standards which
doctors must meet in their practice, in measuring the doctor’s performance in the light
of these standards, and in creating means of redress for the patient and sanctions
against the doctors if these standards are breached.
How can consumerism play these various -roles I have outlined: setting standards,measuring performance and providing remedies or sanctions? There are several
approaches. They are not mutually exclusive. We should consider each of them
carefully. If all of them were implemented, it wouldn’t only be the patient who would
gain. The doctor, too, would benefit, as would the practice of medicine.
The most obvious approach is professional self-regulation. This is an odd,
paternalistic kind of consumerism, in which the professional, presumes to be the
sympathetic advocate of the consumers’ interests. The medical profession already
claims to be a self regulating body. The General Medical Council establishes
standards and seeks to ensure that they are observed. But the Council is concerned
largely with etiquette rather than competence. The various Royal Colleges—for
example, of Surgery, or Psychiatry, or General Practice - also set standards of
professional competence which must be reached before the doctor has access to
certain appointments. That this is not enough, that more is needed, is recognised, at
least tacitly, by the relatively recent establishment in a number of hospitals of a
mechanism called peer review. This involves a regular review and critical
examination of, for example, the treatment programmes adopted by each member of
the staff. Another method of- self-regulation is the formal establishment of what is
called professional audit. As its name suggests, doctors review and evaluate their own
and their colleagues’ clinical methods with a view to improvement. But audits, as yet,
are relatively uncommon. One reason is that there are no clear guides as to the
standards to be applied. The conclusion of the Royal Commission on the National
Health Service was that it was ‘not convinced that the profession generally regards the
introduction of audit or peer review of standards of care and treatment with a proper
sense of urgency’. This is something of an understatement. Adopting what The Times

1

described as ‘a strongly defensive attitude’ at this year’s annual representative
meeting, the British Medical Association rejected the notion of introducing medical
audit. It was, according to one member, ‘unnecessary, undesirable and in some ways
offensive’.
Of course, even when it exists, professional self-regulation is always open to the
criticism that it is not sufficiently energetic, that ranks will be closed to protect a
fellow member, rather than opened to admit the questioning outsider. Certainly, the
medical profession can never be expected to become the champion of the consumers’
cause. When measures as innocuous as self-audit-are met with hostile rejection, it is
clear that other approaches on behalf of the consumers are called for. The profession
is not going to help. Standards will have to be set and measured by others. The
principle of outside scrutiny, a key feature of consumerism, seems inevitable.
Parliament, for example, could pass legislation on the’ consumers’ behalf. Certainly,
as regards the buying and selling of goods, Parliament has been most active. But, in
the context of the practice of medicine, it has avoided laying down, through
legislation, all-but the most general guidelines within which medicine is to be
practised. What Parliament has preferred to do- is either leave matters to the
profession, or establish independent agencies charged with advancing the interests -of
the patient; for example, Community Health Councils or the Health Services
Commissioner, the Ombudsman.
The effectiveness of these agencies depends on their having terms of reference which
enable them to do their jobs effectively, and on receiving appropriate cooperation
from the medical profession. The attitude of doctors is crucial. If doctors perceive the
agencies as adversaries, rather than as partners in the pursuit of a high quality of
medical care and service, then the effectiveness of the agencies is much reduced.
Sadly, once again, the attitude of many doctors is one of hostility. More than most
other groups, doctors have a highly developed sense of territoriality. Having fought
hard to gain their professional independence, it is, of course, almost inevitable that
doctors should seek to guard their achievement. Regrettably, many doctors, especially
those who act as spokesmen of medical opinion, seem to translate this tendency into
an uncritical rejection of the slightest move towards consumerism.
Take, for example, the Community Health Councils, established in 1974 to monitor
services and inform the public. As the Royal Commission on the National Health
Service points out, the Councils are widely criticised by doctors as being a waste of
money in hard times. The East Hertfordshire Community Health Council submitted,
in its evidence to the Royal Commission, that ‘the system is loaded against the
Community Health Council. It has little money, few staff and no sanctions save those
of public opinion’. The British Medical Association this year recommended their
abolition, complaining that they were ‘interfering in matters that did not concern
them’. They were described as ‘unhelpful and disruptive’.
Other mechanisms established by government attract the same opprobrium and have
equally been less effective than may be necessary in advancing patients’ interests. For
example, an established complaints procedure does exist as regards general
practitioners. But the procedures are too formal and complicated and altogether less
than satisfactory. There is no established statutory complaint system as regards

2

medical care in hospitals. One suggestion for reform has been to extend the powers of
the Ombudsman. At present he has a very limited jurisdiction. One particular limit is
that he may not inquire into matters involving a doctor’s clinical judgment, a phrase
which is, of course, delightfully vague. So the suggestion has been made to extend his
jurisdiction by giving him the power to inquire into clinical matters. The
Parliamentary Select Committee recommended this in 1977, as did the Royal
Commission. Predictably, the British Medical Association this year rejected the idea
unanimously.
The picture is depressing. It may be that the interests of patients could be advanced
through appropriate administrative agencies, but it is clear that the present
arrangements are wholly inadequate to the task. Successive governments have been
prepared to do little or nothing, until something awful attracts the attention of the
press and then they deplore it as if it were not their responsibility. As the Royal
Commission complained, ‘It is neither just nor efficient to allow one scandal after
another to erupt, to institute an inquiry and then to pillory those who- have drifted into
the often neglected services.’
As the inept Handbook of Medical Ethics, revised only this year by the British
Medical Association, declares, ‘The ideal personal doctor service can exist only when
the limits to it set by the state are so wide that in day-to-day practice there are no
practical constraints.’ This sort of stubborn intransigence is unjustified not only from
an ethical point of view, particularly in a profession which claims its relationship with
patients rests on trust, and then demands to be trusted, it is also clearly out of line with
the political tenor of the day. Consumerism is with us. The doctor has the choices
only of accepting it willingly and co-operating, or of accepting it unwillingly
The most contentious approach to furthering the interests of patients is private
litigation, suing doctors or hospital administrations or others involved in medical care.
Even the mention of this raises the hackles of the medical profession. You can hear
the protests forming. Nothing could be more damaging to the future of the medical
care than the suggestion that patients sue their doctors. But if you accept that the
power and freedom of the patient are in need of protection, you have already seen that
existing ways of achieving this protection are less than outstanding successes. Selfhelp, in the form of litigation, may then warrant careful consideration. My view is that
it does have some role to play, though rather a limited one, in establishing standards
of practice and ensuring that they are met.
Of course, mention litigation, suing doctors, and most people will immediately think
of the United States. Indeed, one of the problems which bedevils any examination of
this aspect of consumerism is the passion it engenders. And this passion is largely the
product of unthinking and misinformed allusions to conditions in the United States.
Let’s consider some examples of consumerism through litigation, in the context of
medical practice. The first example is a highly charged topic, known in the United
States as the doctrine of informed consent,€ It has not gained much ground yet in the
United Kingdom. It is the product wholly of courts, of case law not statute law, and
represents the courts’ response to what is seen as an unmet need. The doctrine of
informed consent, simply stated, has it that a doctor has an obligation in law to obtain
the consent of his patient before embarking on any procedure. But it goes much

3

farther than that. It also requires doctors to advise their patients of all material risks
involved in the proposed procedure, so that the patient may make an informed
decision on what course to take.
As a doctrine, informed consent flies the flag of self-determination against the
otherwise ever-present paternalism of the doctor. For years doctors have responded to
patients’ questions with responses such as ‘Don’t worry about that’, or ‘Leave it to
me’. Patients have even been persuaded to agree that the doctor, in performing any
procedure or operation, may do whatever he thinks is necessary. For example, women
have had breasts removed, without being consulted, after biopsy has shown the
presence of a tumour, or have undergone a regime of hormone treatment Ignorant of
and therefore unprepared for some of the effects it has produced. Consumerism is
designed, here, to protect the interests of the consumer, the patient, by requiring that
the final decision as to what shall be done to his body rests with him and not with the
doctor. And, of course, it has been reviled by a large sector of the medical profession,
as interfering in and thereby damaging the delicate relationship between doctor and
patient
As I have said, informed consent is a doctrine far more highly developed in the United
States than here in the United Kingdom. Doctors and lawyers here seem to delight in
ridiculing it, and preaching strongly against any movement towards it. The ridicule, in
my view, is unwarranted and born largely of the sort of chauvinist and lofty ignorance
which the English have developed into a higher art form. Of course, there are
examples of unjustified litigation, of unscrupulous patients and lawyers and of
excessive awards of damages. But these are the exception.
The doctrine of informed consent, as it is now operated in the United States, does not
stop at what I have already described, and here is where misunderstanding comes in.
The courts have expanded the doctrine. Patients suffering unexpected harm have sued
their doctors and been successful, even in circumstances where, in the view of most,
the doctors have not been at fault, where they have done all that could have been
expected of them. Take the case of an otherwise healthy woman about to undergo an
operation for a leg injury, caused by jogging. The surgeon visits her and explains, in
general terms, what the operation involves. He doesn’t mention, (who would?) that
there have been two reported cases in the literature, of complications following this
operation. After all, the operation has been performed many hundreds of times. Her
operation is the third to be followed by complications. She sues her surgeon, claiming
she did not consent to the operation because she was not informed of the risk of
complications. This is what makes doctors furious. The doctor has done all he can, all
that anyone would expect, yet the patient, because she now, unexpectedly, has
unsightly scars or a limp, is seeking money by suing him. The explanation is not hard
to find. There is no well-developed health service or social welfare system in the
United States. The old and very poor get health care, of a sort, free of charge. The rest
depend on their insurance cover, which often is inadequate, or on savings. Other
social welfare benefits are not widely available. Thus, if someone suffers harm
unexpectedly, he needs money to pay for additional medical care or to meet other
costs. With no one else to look to, the best source of money is the insurance carried by
the doctor. The patient has made some small contribution to this when he paid his fee
to the doctor and, after all, it is not the doctor who will pay, it is his insurer. The

4

doctor will pass on the costs of his insurance premiums by spreading them among his
patients in the fees he collects
To get this money, however, the patient must sue the doctor and the doctor must be
found liable. And, in holding him liable it appears the court is saying he did some
thing wrong, he failed to obtain informed consent. In truth, the court is merely
ensuring that some form of social welfare system operates, paid out by insurance and
funded from patients’ fees. It is a very inefficient system financially because it has to
carry the costs of litigation, but it is the best the court can do. The court has to do it by
the sleight of hand of judging doctors to l at fault and therefore liable to their patients.
Perhaps it would be more honest if the courts said that doctors should be liable
regardless of any question of their fault. This is, in fact, the effect of their decisions,
even though they are expressed in terms of a failure by the doctor to obtain informed
consent. The object of the exercise is, after all, to compensate where compensation is
needed, and the doctor’s insurance is the best source available. But American courts
have, as yet, been reluctant to go so far as to endorse openly liability without fault,
Perhaps they fear that, if they were so honest, the powerful lobby of the medical
establishment might persuade the legislatures to take action to limit by statute their
power in this area.
A system of adequate health care, free of charge, and an adequate welfare system
would, of course, obviate the need for this form of consumerism, at least as a device
for compensating patients who have suffered harm. But, in the United States, they do
not exist. In the United Kingdom, on the other hand, there is still a social weld fare
system and free health care, at least for the moment, which can serve as the basic
source of funds for patients who complain of harm. So there is obviously less need for
this form of consumerist litigation, so common in the United States, in which money
is the sole objective. On the other hand, it may be that litigation, or the threat of
litigation, is needed where the protection of a principle, the patient’s selfdetermination, is the objective
Furthermore, given the medical profession’s reluctance to discipline its members,
litigation could well provide the necessary sanction to ensure that proper standards
were observed. I would not regard it as a bad thing if more lawsuits were brought
against doctors or hospitals in, for example, cases in which a patient in a mental
hospital was treated without consent. In this way the law could come to the aid of the
inarticulate or helpless who otherwise might remain neglected and forgotten Equally,
it would not be a bad thing in a case in which the full implications of a particular form
of treatment were not explained to the patient, or were discussed only with relatives or
the patient’s spouse Such action would, in my view, lead to a healthier respect for the
patient’s interests than at present seems to exist. And it would tend to ensure that
standards of practice were established which met the approval of outsiders and were
adhered to.
An even more widespread form of consumer litigation in the United States is the
action for negligence. The patient claims that he has suffered harm because of the
failure of the doctor or hospital to behave in a way which could reasonably have been
expected of them. Although the number of cases brought each year in the United
Kingdom is rising, it is still a very small number; many, many times smaller than the
number in the United States. The reasons are complex. There are cultural differences

5

in that, unlike the English, the American is more willing to have recourse to the courts
and less willing to accept what he may see as second-best, since he is paying for it.
There are differences born of the greater resort to surgery in the United States than in
the UK. Surgery carries greater risk of harm than less invasive forms of therapy, but,
in the United States, it produces the high fees which doctors have come to regard as
their due.
But, by far the most important difference is that, once again, the patient in the United
Kingdom has less incentive to sue because he has less need of the money which
success in the lawsuit would bring. Once again, the English patient needing further
care, or disabled in any way, can look initially to the Health Service and Social
Security. His American counterpart can expect less, so must get the money he needs
through the informal and expensive social security system of the doctor’s insurance.
Despite publicity to the contrary, the sums awarded in the United States will not be
great. On average, a successful claimant can expect, around £5,000 to £10,000, which,
given the cost, for example, of further health care, is not high. Thus, the action for
negligence in the United States fills a need which is already largely met in the United
Kingdom. So there is no need for a major increase in negligence actions here.
But what of the circumstances here in which a patient is harmed, for whatever reason,
and is in need of money to purchase care over and above that available from existing
social security sources? You will recall the recent case in Birmingham, in which the
Court of Appeal threw out a judgment for £100,000 awarded to a little boy who
suffered severe brain damage after a forceps delivery. Amid all the trumpeting over
the vindication of the doctor, people seemed to lose sight of the realities of the case.
This was one of those cases in which a large amount of money was needed to pay for
the care which was called for, over and above what was forthcoming from the state.
The question really before the court was, simply: Who should pay?
One option was the little boy’s parents. This would mean that he would get nothing,
as they had no money. It would mean that his mother would struggle on, as she had
done for the ten long years before the case even reached the Court of Appeal. Another
option was the doctor. The court would have had to decide that the doctor was
negligent. Sometimes doctors are in- competent. But this is not often the case. The
Court of Appeal in the Birmingham case decided that the doctor had behaved
reasonably and competently. The court could still have decided that he was negligent.
But this sounds contradictory, that the court first decides the doctor has done nothing
wrong and then decides he was negligent. It need not be contradictory. It would
merely involve redefining the concept of negligence. In common speech negligence
may well mean carelessness. But its legal meaning need not be the same. Take the
words ‘insanity’ or ‘duress’. Their meaning in terms of law is quite different from the
meaning they have in common speech. After all, negligence is merely a legal device.
It is flexible. Its meaning is not set in stone for ever. It, like the whole of the law, is
dynamic. Just as social circumstances and social needs change, so must the law
change and adapt. Negligence is a legal tool doing a job. If the job changes, the tool
can be reshaped. It could have given the court the chance to develop the law, so as to
give the little boy the money he needed. The court could have decided that, even in
the absence of fault on the part of the doctor, he was negligent, by redefining
negligence. This, in the view of many, is what has happened in the United States.

6

Negligence there has lost much of its quality of blameworthiness or fault. Of course,
doctors who are found negligent get hopping mad. They haven’t been negligent, they
argue, meaning they haven’t done anything wrong. They don’t understand, because
it’s not made clear to them, that negligence is no more than a legal device, allowing a
particular socially desirable conclusion to be arrived at. It has become a convenient
device whereby needed money can be channelled to those who have become the
casualties of medicine.
But why, you ask, do the courts have to talk of negligence at all, since it does
inevitably carry that tag of carelessness, which inevitably harms a doctor’s reputation?
Why don’t the courts just create another legal device? Well, traditionally, courts,
particularly in the United Kingdom, are reluctant to break entirely fresh ground. They
are not like Haroun al Raschid sitting under a palm tree, dispensing justice. They tend
towards conservatism. They move slowly, gradually, so as not to take the world by
surprise. Some innovations, they think, are better left to Parliament. Of course, the
precise calculation of what is for Parliament and what for them varies with time, the
particular judges and whether or not Parliament chooses to do anything. The fact that
courts in the United States feel less inhibited is one reason why consumerism through
litigation is so much more developed there.
In the Birmingham case, the Court of Appeal decided that the doctor was not
negligent. All this means is that the court resisted the invitation to extend the legal
meaning of negligence, whatever its meaning in common speech, so as to allow the
little boy to recover compensation from the doctor. The court was right to do so, not
because of any question of whether’ the doctor was at fault or not. This can be
irrelevant, as we have seen, if the goal of compensating the boy is deemed socially
desirable. The real reason is that, if doctors were held liable, it would be their
insurance which would meet the cost. But the insurance premiums paid by doctors in
the United Kingdom are insufficient to meet such claims on any scale. Nor could
doctors easily pay increased premiums since, within the National Health Service, they
could not pass on the cost of such increases to patients by way of increased fees.
Thus, neither party to the litigation in Birmingham ought to bear the costs of the care
the little boy needed, despite the fact that we may agree he should receive it. So, in the
event, he got nothing.
This leads me to the third option for meeting the little boy’s financial needs. A fund
could be created, managed by an appropriate government agency and financed from
public revenue. Money would be provided as a matter of course, on proof of need. In
my view, this is clearly the only proper solution. There are precedents for it in the
cases of the children damaged by thalidomide and through whooping cough vaccine.
But, only recently, the Royal Commission on Compensation for Personal Injury
rejected this view. I submit it deserves reconsideration. Lord Justice Lawton echoed
this view when he concluded his judgment in the Court of Appeal by saying ‘the
victims of medical mishaps of the present kind should be cared for by the community,
not by the hazards of litigation’.
So consumerist litigation through the device of negligence, on behalf of patients who
have suffered harm, so much a feature of American consumerism, has little place here
in the United Kingdom. It achieves neither of the goals consumerism is aimed at. It
does not provide financial compensation, when needed, to injured patients. The courts

7

have quite rightly been reluctant to extend negligence to cover circumstances in which
doctors haven’t behaved carelessly, and even when the doctor has been careless, it is
very difficult and time-consuming for the patient to recover compensation in the
lottery of litigation. Furthermore, doctors’ insurance provides an inadequate source of
funds.
The second goal of consumerism is that of disciplining bad doctors, ensuring that
proper standards are maintained, that future patients are protected. Negligence
litigation does not achieve these. The careless doctor does not pay any damages
awarded. His insurance company pays. And, in any event, private litigation is not the
proper way to operate a system aimed at dealing with the incompetent, and protecting
other patients from harm. Consumerism must take another tack. A wholly separate
method of supervision and sanction must be created, with power of suspension or
removal from practice for those found to be incompetent. The impetus will have to
come from the consumer, and the consumer will have to be prominently represented
on any Board or Committee which is set up. This is a task which consumerism has
only just begun to grapple with. It is very much a task for the future.

8

