REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 5: The Doors of Mental Illness
TRANSMISSION: 3 December 1980 – Radio 4

George says he is going to kill himself. What should we do? Should we express
concern? Should we do more, and, if so, what more? Is George ill? Is George
mentally ill? Bill believes, quite wrongly, that the Inland Revenue is pursuing a
vendetta against him. He leaves home and family and begins to wander around, living
rough. What should we do? Should we try to persuade him to see someone and, if so,
whom should he see? And if he says no, what then? Is Bill ill? Is Bill mentally ill?
Tom believes that this country’s problems will be solved only if immigrants from the
new Commonwealth countries are caused to leave. He makes speeches regularly and
publishes a monthly newsletter which pursues this theme. What should we do about
Tom? Is he ill? Is Tom mentally ill?
These questions are among the more taxing we face in our modern society. Any
answers must draw on our sense of right and wrong, of propriety, of normality, of
order of law and authority, and perhaps, most significant, our sense of freedom and
responsibility, especially our sense of freedom and responsibility. At what point does
caring become controlling? At what point does freedom become dangerous? This to
me is what is involved in any examination of mental illness. As I search for an
answer, keep in mind that these are practical problems. Keep in mind that the easiest
solution, at least superficially, is to put people away’, as the expression goes. This has
a fine historical precedent. To what extent can we or should we continue to do it is a
question which will dog us throughout. Keep in mind that my concern throughout
these lectures has been with the twin notions of responsibility and power, in the
context of the practice of medicine. Nowhere are these notions more clearly involved
than in the context of mental illness. To be judged mentally ill is to be judged, to a
greater or lesser extent, not responsible. The implications for freedom and its denial
are profound. You only get your life back when others judge you responsible again.
Any consideration of mental illness must take as its starting-point the question, what
is mental illness? It is common knowledge that there are some who argue vehemently
that mental illness is, in the words of the most famous polemicist Thomas Szasz, a
myth. He has it that the notion of mental illness exists as a mechanism for social
control, for medicalising, medicating, even incarcerating those regarded as social
misfits. It represents a conspiracy between us and the specialist, the expert. It looks
respectable if the expert does it, whereas we would feel uncomfortable, or even guilty,
if we used other social means to achieve the object desired. And, Szasz seems to
argue, we have created a monster. The power, once granted to experts, can’t be taken
away. So we stumble along and hope not too much harm is done.
Of course, Szasz does not go unanswered. Psychiatrists, psychologists, analysts and
laymen line up regularly to shoot at him, each one delivering what he sees as the coup
de grace. They dispute the very basis of his objection to mental illness, so it is as well

1

to recall what this is. The principal point made by Szasz is that the word ‘illness’ is
properly applied to physical illness, where a disease entity exists. No such physical
disease entity exists in the case of mental illness, therefore it cannot be called illness.
It is, instead, a moral or political judgment. But this argument is fundamentally
flawed. The flaw does not lie in the point that there are, in fact, disease entities in the
case of mental illness. Rather, the flaw lies in the failure to understand that illness, in
the form of alleged physical illness, is equally a normative or judgmental term. Illness
is more than the existence of a set of objective conditions. It is a judgment that a
particular status, that of being ill, ought to be ascribed to someone in whom those
conditions are present. Depending on the judgment made, the doctor grants or
withholds the status. So, there is no reason in principle why the notion of illness
should be restricted to physical states. It can just as well be extended to thoughts,
mood or behaviour. If it is thought that these warrant the evaluative judgment that
they should be regarded as illness, then illness they can be.
Equally, in principle, for want of a better term, they can be called mental illnesses.
Thus, in short, the intellectual basis for Szasz’s argument is misconceived. It is not a
telling argument to say, as does Szasz, that there is no such thing as mental illness,
since illness is not a thing. Despite this flaw, the insight and observations of Szasz
remain valuable. He asks the right questions even if for the wrong reason. For what
has to be considered is whether the judgmental term ‘illness’ should be used in the
way it is.
Before going on, perhaps I ought to respond to the arguments of those who say that
there are specific disease entities and conditions which amount to mental illness.
There are, for example, those who regard the mind as being the product of the
complex biochemistry of the brain. At -least for them, the day may soon dawn when
we can relate mental qualities and attributes to the brain’s biochemistry. They would
deduce from this the dramatic assertion that mental illness will then be shown, in fact,
to be mere biochemical malfunctioning. Mental illness will then be just another form
of physical illness. Things are not so easy. This materialist way out is hopelessly
flawed. Notice the circularity in the argument that mental illness is biochemical
malfunctioning. It begs the question. It assumes what has to be proved: that certain
particular mental states, ways of thinking, moods, behaviour, temperament, ought to
be regarded as illnesses. Only when we agree that they ought to be so regarded will
any biochemical abnormality be relevant. Equally, until we do agree which mental
states should be regarded as illnesses, biochemistry is unimportant, for there are, of
course, numerous biochemical deviations from a notional norm in all of us. Most
won’t be regarded as indicative of illness. Only those correlating most closely with
behaviour we have already decided to categorise as mentally ill will be selected.
Those who look to biochemistry, therefore, have the cart very firmly before the horse.
To those who do not sail under this flag, the mind is more than its biochemistry,
though what more and how so is not readily clear. Denying that the mind is
completely to be understood in terms of material substance, it is not readily open to
them to describe mental illness in terms of diseased parts. Ultimately they are forced
to fall back on the notion of disease by analogy, as indicating a deviation from the
norm which if it were in the context of the physical body would be called a disease.
When even the notion of disease by analogy seems too strong, or causes momentary
intellectual misgivings, you see the term ‘mental disorder’ being used, conveying the

2

notion that whatever the proper order is, or ought to be, this person’s mental order
isn’t.
So, I regard the disease approach to mental illness as untenable. This is not to say that
mental illness is a myth, merely that the efforts of those engaged in practising the
arcane skills of mental health care to defend it on materialist grounds seem
insupportable.
Is there a better way of understanding mental illness? The key, of course, lies in its
counterpart, mental health. Just as with other notions of health, a norm is involved. In
this case, it is a norm of thinking, of behaviour, mood or feeling. To describe someone
as mentally ill represents a judgment that his thinking or mentation, mood, behaviour
or feeling, deviates sufficiently from the norm to warrant ascribing the status ill to
him. And there you have the dilemma of mental illness. As a notion it is
unmanageable. If, in the case of purported physical illness, it was difficult to map out
the limits and bounds of the appropriate use of the concept of illness, it Is that much
more difficult in the case of mental illness. Yet map them out we must, for what is at
stake is a concern for each person’s liberty and self-determination. It is imperative
that the power of the expert to use the label ‘mentally ill’ not go unsupervised. But
there seems no ready limit to its use, it is such a will-o’-the-wisp. At least, in the case
of physical illness, though it is a judgmental term, it is a judgment made in the light of
the presence of some physical condition. This gives some guide, albeit very
rudimentary, to the proper use and meaning of the term. But the very immateriality of
mental illness, its other-worldliness, its association with the subjective world of the
mind, rather than any physical state, deprives us of even this guide to the limit of its
proper use. So, each time we challenge the use of the term ‘mental illness’ in a
particular case, there Is no ready guide or boundary to point to so as to show that the
particular application of the term is inappropriate or unjustified. We are forced to
challenge the very basis of the concept, to deny its validity, or to say that, even if it is
valid as a notion, we do not think it should be applied to the particular case before us.
But the entrenched power of those who manipulate the concept of mental illness and
the fact that they have bootstrapped themselves into intellectual respectability serve to
defeat such challenges. ‘If you don’t believe in mental illness, what more can we
say?’ It may appear a weak argument, but our ready acceptance of the authority of the
community of experts and their willingness, indeed desire, to use their power for their
own continued existence allow it to carry the day. Equally, to say that George or Bill
or Tom is not, in your opinion, mentally ill is to be met by such ready responses as,
‘What do you know about it? ‘, or, ‘As experts, we think otherwise.’ Again, the power
of the expert rather than the power of the argument defeats the challenge. Thus,
intellectually and conceptually, there are no ready limits, no rationally defensible
borders, to the notion of mental illness. It is a question of accepting the whole
package or being thought a fool or a rabble-rouser. The implication, of course, is that
we forfeit the right and ability to question the manipulation of the notion, the
propriety of its attribution to George or Bill or Tom. All the power lies with the
expert, and we must just hope and trust.
As I have said, someone is deemed mentally ill when he deviates from the appropriate
norm of mental health. Let us now concentrate on this norm for a while. By so doing I
shall attempt to explain how someone comes to be categorised as mentally ill. There

3

are, in fact, two steps. The first involves a determination that George’s thoughts or
moods are abnormal. The second entails a further judgment, the nature of which is
most elusive. It has something to do with how important—and I choose a vague term
at this stage—the abnormality is.
Consider the first step. To ask the question, what are normal thoughts, is to expose the
nature of the enterprise. Heaven alone knows what thoughts all of us harbour, or have
harboured, in our time. If the norm were a composite of the thoughts and moods of all
of us who confidently assert we are not mentally ill, then the norm would have no
meaning, because it would embrace just about everything susceptible of being
thought. So it has to be something different. It has to be a norm based on what we
think people should think or feel, a standard we set for ourselves, though we may not
keep it. Stated in this fashion, it can be seen that the norm involved is a moral, or
social, or political one. It is a composite of the right moral, social and political
thoughts. So as not to throw the baby out with the bathwater, I’ll concede that there
may be near- universal agreement that certain thoughts are wrong. For example, for
me to think that walking naked through the streets of London is socially appropriate
would be wrong. But even if we accept that this is wrong, there is other conduct about
which there would not be near-universal agreement as to its rightness or wrongness;
and, of course, near-universal agreement is only a satisfactory criterion of what is
right provided that you accept the principle of right by numbers. So, even at this first
stage, we grant power to those claiming expertise to make moral, social or political
judgments about the rightness of someone’s thoughts, or mood, or feeling, or
behaviour. Of course, to say that one must think right thoughts or run the risk of being
labelled mentally ill is to conjure up the image of 1984, or of the Soviet Union, or
some other nasty place. But unwrapped from its package of expertise, and what some
have mischievously christened psycho-babble, this is what you have here in your
midst—more subtle, yes, and less oppressive in the fact, perhaps, but still the same.
The second step is then involved. Your thoughts are abnormal, wrong.
But is the abnormality important enough to warrant invoking the judgment mental
illness? What does important mean here? This is, of course, at the heart of any
discussion of mental health. There are two elements in my notion of importance: that
which is so threatening that it goes beyond what we are prepared to tolerate; and that
which evokes a particular kind of sympathy, in that the expert involved would wish
paternalistically and, perhaps, patronisingly to do something. These two elements are
eminently flexible and vague, even though they are so significant. Different things
threaten different people. Equally, our view of those who need and deserve help may
vary with the fashions of the day. But, if the thoughts, or mood, or behaviour already
judged to be abnormal and therefore wrong, are, on these tests, also judged to be
importantly wrong, then the process of segregating someone as mentally ill is set in
motion. The first step is to take control over the person, because to be mentally ill is
to be out of control. Usually, the very act of diagnosing him as mentally ill is
sufficient to allow the expert to gain control. If any doubt arises, we are, of course,
always ready to support the expert in his view. Once controlled, by being labelled,
and thereby under the power of the expert, the question of what response should be
made, what should be done with, or to, the person, can be duly considered.
The implications of this process are clear. We have chosen to allow the coming into
being of a group of people who claim an expertise in mental health or right thinking.

4

We have chosen to allow them to apply the status ill to those of our fellow men whose
thoughts, or words, or behaviour do not pass muster. We have done this knowing that
the nature of the expertise is in reality the exercise of moral, social and political
judgment concerning the worth of someone’s thinking. We must realise that this
power, once granted, is not easily taken away. But we have slept easily in our beds,
secure in the knowledge that, here at least, the power is not abused. Only those whom
we would all regard as having really abnormal thoughts and posing a real threat, or
really in need of care, attract the status mentally ill.
The reality may not conform to this cosy image. One in three hospital beds is
occupied by those categorised as mentally ill. One in eight or nine of us will, at some
time in his life, be diagnosed as suffering from mental illness. Some have spoken of
an epidemic of mental illness. Is it that the experts are being a little too zealous,
seeing mental illness around every corner, spotting threatening thoughts and people
needing help with their thoughts at every, turn, or are there other explanations?. The
explanation I offer is that two contradictory patterns of behaviour can be seen. On the
one hand, large numbers of people seek the refuge of the status ill. To be classified as
ill is to be excused of everyday responsibility, to be treated like a child. The stigma of
being categorised as mentally, ill is, of course, still with us, though less pronounced.
But, to some, it may be a price worth paying for the refuge they seek. On the other
hand, while some may choose it, others may have the status forced upon them. They,
too, find the pressures of our harsh world insupportable. They’re not limited to those
who metaphorically crack from these pressures. They may well include, depending on
the nature of the society at the time, those who do not or will not fit. A successful,
open and confident society tolerates wide variations in thought and behaviour. A
society under stress becomes less tolerant. The forces of law become more vigilant or
oppressive, depending on the view taken.
But the process is not limited to the forces of law. Others involved in the maintenance
of the prevailing social values are pressed into aid. Mental illness experts are among
them. Political differences can become deviance, a code-word on occasions for ill.
Social protest can become irrational and dangerous behaviour. The black man who
makes a speech calling for the destruction of the ‘white devils’ will be remanded for a
psychiatric report. Sexual predilections can become sick depravities. We begin to use
madness as a metaphor for those things we disapprove of in our society. Suddenly the
metaphor takes on a life of its own. That which was metaphor now becomes illness.
The doors of mental illness are cranked open to receive new classes of wrong
thinkers. The expert becomes society’s agent, the socialiser, even, on occasions, the
thought policeman. The similarity between the processes of criminal law and the
resort to the notion of mental illness are clear, but the crucial distinction is that the
criminal law does not prohibit mere thoughts, nor does it reach a verdict without trial
and the right to appeal.
In between these two groups are the mass of mentally ill, unhappy, awkward social
misfits, who neither volunteer themselves for mental illness nor attract the status of
mentally ill because of their threatening ways. By their conduct, by their inability to
cope, by their position on the outskirts of our reality, they are noticed and it is decided
that something ought to be done.

5

What I have sought to do so far is to demonstrate the shaky intellectual basis on which
the concept of mental illness rests. It follows that very great caution must be exercised
in visiting the status of mentally ill upon someone. The implications, both in terms of
the freedom and responsibility of the individual and in terms of the power of the
professional, cannot be overstated. This is particularly true in those circumstances in
which we go so far as to sanction the compulsory detention in hospitals of certain
groups of those classified as mentally ill. Twenty-one thousand people in England are
compulsorily admitted to hospital every year. They may then be subjected to
treatment without their consent, and lose most of the freedoms and rights associated
with citizenship—voting, taking a matter to court, spending money or making a will.
It is hardly surprising that the idea of compulsory detention of the mentally ill attracts
the greatest concern. The grounds on which a person may be detained are set out in
the 1959 Mental Health Act. They are ill-defined, as befits anything concerned with
mental illness. The person has to be suffering from a mental disorder, which is
defined, if that be the correct word, to include mental illness, severe sub-normality or
psychopathic personality. Then the disorder has to be ‘of a nature and degree which
justifies detention’, and it must be ‘in the interest of his health or safety or for the
protection of others’, that he should be detained. That someone’s liberty should rest
on such flimsy criteria and the say-so of someone claiming expertise is startling. But,
despite numerous efforts and recommendations, the words have remained unchanged
now for 21 years.
So, it is against this background that I now turn from analysis to prescription. I offer
my proposals on how we should approach mental illness in the future. I would
concede, at the very outset, that there is some validity in the notion of mental illness.
It offers us the opportunity to ascribe the status ill to someone whose thoughts or
feelings, mood or behaviour we judge to be abnormal. In granting this status we can
offer relief from responsibility to the person designated ill, we can show him that we
are prepared to care for him and about him and we can allow those who specialise in
treating the mentally ill the opportunity to do so, to the extent we judge their
treatments justified. But I am acutely aware, of the normative nature of the status, the
difficulty of identifying the norm and the implications it carries in terms of loss of
liberty and responsibility. So, I would seek to define more carefully the criteria of the
status mentally ill, to limit the circumstances in which it may be applied and thus, by
implication, limit the power of the expert. Obviously, I cannot do more than sketch an
outline here. I offer a general framework, aware that some degree of vagueness is
inevitable.
There would be three classes of person to whom the status could be applied. The first
class would consist of those who by their conduct, as well as their thinking, become
dangerous to others. It would not be enough merely to entertain thoughts which, if
carried out, would be dangerous. There would have to be some positive conduct, some
action which posed a threat to the community. This is, after all, what the criminal law
calls for. Care would have to be taken to separate the criminal who ought to be
blamed and take moral responsibility, and the person who ought not to be blamed.
Given that this is ultimately a moral and social decision, I see no reason why it should
not be made by a committee of lay people or a jury. It is not a matter of expertise,
since there are no experts possessed of greater insight into what our moral values
ought to be than the rest of us. If the danger was sufficiently grave, I would condone
the compulsory detention of such a person. If he was detained, there would have to be

6

a tribunal or committee, established by law, which would periodically review whether
his detention was justified. If it was not, he would, of course, be released. Such a
committee or tribunal would, once again, consist of lay people, though, of course, it
would hear the views of those claiming expertise. And, of course, the detained person
would have all the rights appropriate to someone detained against his will, including
an opportunity, to appeal and access to an adviser, whether lawyer or layman.
The second class of persons would consist of those who requested help. They would
be the unhappy, the depressed, those who found the stress of life difficult to bear. It
would be for such a person to ask for help; help must not be forced upon him. And if
he chose to diagnose himself as mentally ill, in that he chose to consult those who
specialise in mental health, then so be it. The usual range of services would be made
available to him. There would be no case for admitting such a person to hospital,
unless he sought this.
The third and final class would consist of those who ought to be helped, as they
appear helpless. This is, of course, a wide and potentially unmanageable category. It
looks, I admit, not unlike the woolly sort of categorisation I have previously been
criticising. But it need not be. It would differ in that legislation would have to be
drafted which was far more carefully and narrowly drawn than the present Mental
Health Act. It would differ in that helplessness would be specifically related, not to
bogus diseases or disorders but to demonstrable facts which would have to be proved.
Such facts would be a person’s inability to perform the basic tasks of life, such as
procuring food, or practising hygiene, or finding lodging. It would differ in that
provision would be made for distinguishing between the odd, the eccentric or the
apparently foolhardy, and the helpless warranting help. By definition, membership of
this class would warrant something being done to the helpless person, acting
paternalistically without his consent. It would involve compulsion and possibly,
detention. So, provision would be made for a formal hearing before any decision to
impose help was made, except in the rare emergency case. Also, provision would be
made for periodic review of the detention, so that no one could be forgotten, lost for
ever in the back wards. It would differ from the existing situation in that I can see no
reason why such decisions should be taken by those claiming expertise. Given the fact
that liberty is involved as well as a sense of caring, it is appropriate that lay people,
whether as committee or jury, should decide.
It only remains to remind you that what I said as regards other illnesses is equally true
here. We must redirect our energies and resources towards identifying and then
preventing the factors which bring about the ills I have described. In mental illness,
prevention may go to the root of our culture. This shows us the dimensions of the
task. It need not deflect us.

7

