REITH LECTURES 1980: Unmasking Medicine
Ian Kennedy
Lecture 4: If I Were You, Mrs B
TRANSMISSION: 26 November 1980 – Radio 4

In practising medicine doctors routinely make decisions, they make judgments. This
much is commonplace. But what sort of judgments or decisions are they? The
immediate reply of most people would be that they are judgments based on the
technical skill and training of the doctor. I do not agree. Doctors make decisions as to
what ought to be done. Some, but only some, of these decisions are matters of
technical skill; that is, based on the observation of objective facts and the application
of particular skills in the light of such facts. I submit the majority of decisions taken
by doctors are not technical. They are, instead, moral and ethical. They are decisions
about what ought to be done in the light of certain values. Now, this creates a
problem. Doctors claim a special, indeed unique, competence in a particular area—the
practice of medicine. So medical judgments, medical decisions, are for them and them
alone. But if I am right that it is a fundamental feature of medical practice that doctors
are making ethical judgments, it means that ethics, to the extent that they touch on
how doctors choose to practise medicine, are something for them and them alone.
This is a surprising, and even dangerous notion.
It would normally be accepted that ethical principles, the principles by reference to
which we organise our lives and decide what we ought or ought not to do, are not the
preserve of any one group. But the doctor may reply that, yes, he does make ethical
decisions, but these are medical ethics and so they are properly for doctors alone. This
would suggest that there is a realm of ethics unique to medicine and within the unique
competence of doctors to determine and apply. My response is that medical ethics are
not separate from but part of the general moral and ethical order by which we live.
Decisions as to what the doctor ought to do must therefore be tested against the
ethical principles of the society. He has no special dispensation to depart from our
moral and ethical order. It must be wrong that a doctor, by describing a decision as
medical, can claim unique competence to make such a decision, even if it touches the
basic values by which we live our lives. For, if doctors claim unique competence it
must be something they are uniquely competent to do. But doctors are not uniquely
competent to make ethical decisions. They receive no training to prepare them for
such a role.
So, put rather bluntly, what I am calling for is a wholesale re-examination of the
sphere of alleged competence of the doctor. If you agree with me, as I take you
through some examples, that doctors are indeed making ethical decisions in a rather
haphazard, idiosyncratic way, then you will want to consider how best we should
respond. We may seek to insist that doctors conform to standards and principles set
down by all of us. We may suggest that the education of doctors prepare them more
appropriately for the decisions they are called on to make. We may be content merely
to remind them that they must look over their shoulders from time to time to make
sure we approve of what they are doing. In large part, I am sure, doctors will

1

recognise the truth in what I am suggesting. It’s just that they seem to operate on
some form of automatic pilot when it comes to matters of ethics. We must gain their
attention and provide the correct navigation.
Take the following propositions. You would not, for example, consider the law of
homicide, and exceptions to it, to be a matter for doctors alone to decide upon. Nor
would you regard it proper for doctors alone to decide when principles of honesty
should be observed or waived. Nor would you regard it properly for doctors alone to
decide the appropriate conditions for family life. These are all examples of social and
political decisions which go to the root of our culture. Would it surprise you then to
realise that each is an example of a decision commonly taken by doctors and regarded
as uniquely within their competence to make. And, by being uniquely within their
competence, it follows that only doctors, and no one else, may properly challenge
such a decision.
It is doctors, for example, who decide whether or not to treat a baby born severely
disabled. If untreated the baby will usually die, through what may be called benign
neglect. There is no mechanic’s manual, no technician’s guide, which indicates when
treatment is justified. Instead, the doctor decides, on the basis of some rough-andready calculus of the baby’s future quality of life. And I use the cliché ‘rough-andready’, because it captures the quality of the doctor’s decision, a decision by rote,
which has become a stereotype without need for deliberation. Furthermore, the
decision varies with the doctor. There is no agreed course of action even among
doctors. In figurative terms, the baby in Barnsley lives, the baby in Bradford dies.
And, in the process—if one can play the lawyer for a moment—the law of homicide
has its tail twisted. This would not be the first time we have turned a blind eye. But,
we should all be given the chance to know and to decide, on the basis of clear and
agreed- upon principles.
Nor is the ethical dilemma limited to new-born babies. It arises each time the doctor
decides whether or not to try to resuscitate the person who has attempted suicide. It
arises each time the doctor weighs up what to do about his elderly patient who lies
paralysed from his latest stroke and now has pneumonia. Should he treat the
pneumonia so that the patient may live another couple of weeks or months? Or should
he let the pneumonia be the old man’s friend, as it used to be?
Now, consider Mrs X. She has cancer. It is decided that the cancer will not respond to
treatment and that she will die within a matter of weeks or months. Given that such
predictions are at best guesses, the question that then arises in the mind of her doctor
is what should he tell her. Should he tell her the truth about her condition or offer
some alternative story which is perhaps more optimistic? The assumptions which
underlie these questions are obvious People do not want to die, neither do they want
to know they are dying, nor could they tolerate being told they are dying, nor do they
know they are dying. Some or even all of these assumptions may be well- founded on
occasions but they are unsupported by any evidence. They reflect the anxieties of the
healthy. In fact, what surveys there are show that the large majority of patients with,
for example, cancer would prefer to know the truth. By contrast, doctors ordinarily
choose not to tell. Perhaps the most important assumption underlying the question of
what to tell the patient is that it is the doctor who is uniquely qualified to decide what
the patient should know.

2

Of course, once the view is allowed that patients do not want to know the truth,
rationalisations can readily be created which serve to justify the position. The notion
that the patient does not wish to know soon becomes the patient should not know. One
argument commonly used is that the diagnosis is uncertain. But a study published in
1978 demonstrated that uncertainty over diagnosis was not the reason for withholding
information, thoug1 it was used to justify it. The better explanation for noncommunication was uncertainty, not over diagnosis, but over how much each patient
wished to know, an uncertainty largely produced by the doctors’ own anxieties. The
doctors realised that some patients may indeed wish to know the truth but, since
without asking they could not know which patients, they managed the problem by not
telling anyone. This may have provided the ideal coping mechanism for the doctors.
But it meant that only the patient who insisted on the truth and was confident enough
to be persistent, got his way.
Another rationalisation resorted to is the so-called therapeutic privilege. This suggests
that, as a matter of good medical practice, circumstances exist in which the doctor
may withhold information from his patient, if in the exercise of his discretion and
judgment it wouldn’t be in the best interests of the patient’s health to know. This is
clearly a device created by doctors to do what is in the best interests of doctors. It may
be justified on some occasions but there is no effort to specify these occasions.
Everything proceeds on the basis of the particular doctor’s judgment. It all boils down
to the doctor being good, gentle and kind. It would be nice if all our doctors were like
this. But, just in case, can’t we have some more certain guarantees that our interests,
as defined by us, may be allowed to prevail? The device of the therapeutic privilege
pays lip- service to the principles of truth-telling and self-determination, while it
creates a discretionary exception which is quite capable of swallowing these
principles when the doctor decides the occasion requires it.
If we look beneath these rationalisations we see an ethical principle which is certainly
not part of received tradition in analysing the doctor-patient relationship. The
traditional view is that the doctor- patient relationship rests on trust or at least on
agreement. But what we see is an operational principle defined by the doctor and
accepted by us by default, which allows the doctor to suspend the trust or rewrite the
agreement when in his view this is appropriate. Of course, if the patient breaks his
trust or violates the agreement, there may be dire consequences for him, even to the
extent of his forfeiting further care. Not so the doctor. He remains arbiter of the
relationship, even to the extent of claiming the privilege of resort to an operational
principle which is the precise opposite of traditional ethics. For, it is a basic moral
principle of our society that we should tell the truth.
So far, the examples I have referred to are fairly commonplace. We would all have
recognised them as typical of medical practice even if we would not all have
recognised the ethical nature of the decisions made. It may be that some of you would
be content to leave things as they are, despite the far-reaching significance of some of
the decisions taken. Well, let me press you a little further. Let me press the point that
decisions taken by doctors are of such a nature that a check should exist on the power
this grants to them. I want now to look not at specific examples but across a whole
area of medical practice, that concerned with reproduction and birth. I want to identify
for you the ethical principles by reference to which this area of medicine is practised.

3

You may not as easily recognise the decisions which are taken as being part of
traditional doctoring. They seem far more clearly for us to take rather than leave to the
doctor alone. Perhaps when you have heard what I suggest you will be more prepared
to accept my thesis, that doctors are involved in making decisions which are more
than technical. They are ethical decisions about us. They closely affect our lives. They
are made without reference to agreed principles. They invest great power in the
doctor. And they are regarded, at least by doctors, as uniquely within their
competence to make such that their power is not easily checked.
So, let’s turn to medical practice concerned with reproduction and birth. Let me
quickly suggest some of the contexts in which medicine is involved, and in which
decisions are made by doctors. Obviously there is abortion. Then there is the
treatment of severely handicapped newly born babies which I have already
mentioned. Then there is the screening of pregnant mothers and foetuses to identify
deviations from the chosen norm. There is the provision of genetic counselling to
parents to help those who may bear a disabled child make their decision whether or
not to have a child. There is medicine aimed at inducing fertility—for example,
artificial insemination and, most recently, in vitro fertilisation—the so-called test-tube
baby. And there is contraception, which includes, of course, sterilisation. On careful
analysis, decisions taken by doctors in these areas of medicine, despite the superficial
differences, can be shown to rest upon certain underlying common assumptions which
are ethical in nature. I suggest, furthermore, that these common ethical assumptions
are unstated, unarticulated and certainly unremarked, because it is probably not
appreciated by doctors or lay people that they are being made. Yet when they are
identified they can be shown to be of very great significance, reflecting and affecting
as they do our approach to childbearing, child-rearing and the value of life. You may
well wish to consider who it is who should decide whether you are fit to raise
children. Consider what Professor Henry Miller of Newcastle Medical School once
wrote, that final decisions on such matters as planned parenthood rest often with
parents, but, ‘ the trouble is, of course, that the parents from whom difficult decisions
are most likely to be required are all too often drawn from the most feckless sections
of the population’.
The first assumption I would identify is that some are more fit than others for
childbearing and child-raising, with the implication that the unfit should not bear or
raise children. But, if we were to attempt abstractly to devise a set of criteria of fitness
to be a parent, I doubt if we would get very far. Clearly, what is at the heart of the
assumption is a concern for the potential child. Yet there is an extraordinary
ambivalence in how this concern is demonstrated. On the one hand, it seems to be
reflected in a doctor’s decision to sterilise the mentally retarded girl before she can get
pregnant and bear a child whose future may be less than happy. And the decision by
doctors to offer artificial insemination only to stable married couples who have passed
some sort of parental fitness test seems to express the same concern for the welfare of
future children. Equally, the latest reproductive technology of in vitro fertilisation will
be offered by the doctors concerned only to couples who have passed the same
parental fitness test. Parenthood is to be encouraged, indeed facilitated, but only in
certain circumstances. It is to be prevented in others. The guiding criterion is concern
for future children.

4

But the ambivalence creeps in when the same doctor refuses to perform an abortion,
just as much a medical practice in the area of reproduction as are the others. Where is
the concern for the future child there? Or where is it, when he refuses contraceptives
to a girl under 16. The doctor doubtless regards her as unfit to be a mother, to bring a
child into the world, but his decision not to prescribe contraceptive pills may well
have precisely this effect. In these two cases the ethical principle of fitness to be a
parent which previously guided the doctor seems lost, though arguably it is more than
appropriately applied here. Instead, he seems to be operating on another ethical
principle, that a woman ought to bear the child conceived. Whether it is in the child’s
best interest to be born is suddenly of less importance. It is almost as if the child is
seen as punishment, that it is no more than is deserved.
There is, in effect, a complicated intermingling of a whole set of principles or, some
would say, prejudices or biases. On the one hand, there is a policy of eugenics,
seeking the right parents. But, on the other hand, there is a policy of retribution
whereby children must be brought into the world regardless. And these policies are
completely within the power of doctors to operate. As one writer points out, it is clear
that in the case, for example, of abortion, doctors operate a system of screening of
women which has nothing at all to do with the legal requirements. Single women
seem to be divided into ‘the girl who made a mistake’ and ‘the bad girl’. Women have
to be very careful in their management of their relationship with their doctor. If the
good girl is suitably contrite she gets her abortion. The bad girl doesn’t. It would only
encourage her to be promiscuous. The ethics involved are crude and contradictory.
Yet they pass unstated and unchallenged, as part of the practice of reproductive
medicine. - We happily leave it all to the doctors and shouldn’t be surprised at the
idiosyncratic and contradictory principles which emerge.
Another ethical assumption which underlies medical thinking and practice concerned
with reproduction and birth is that a baby should not be born or, if born, should not be
encouraged to live, if the quality of life the child would enjoy falls below a certain
standard. Of course, the first observation is that what amounts to a minimum quality
of life is not set out anywhere. Indeed, if one attempted to do so, the opposition and
the hostility which would greet the attempt would swiftly dissuade others. Yet I am
suggesting this principle, inarticulate and idiosyncratic as it may be, is one of the most
significant guiding principles in this area of medical practice. Once again, the alleged
motive is concern for the child. We can see this clearly in the practice of selective
treatment of severely handicapped newly born babies. The most severely handicapped
do not receive surgery or antibiotics and are encouraged to die peacefully, or, to use
the words of Dr John Lorber, one of the most famous specialists, the babies are not
encouraged to live. This same concern for the child is also reflected in the law and
practice of abortion, where there is less than the usual opposition when abortion on
the grounds that the child will be genetically severely handicapped is raised.
Furthermore, the modern practice of screening pregnant mothers is posited on this
assumption, that it would not be in the interests of the child or mother if a genetically
disabled child were born.
And we have witnessed in tandem with the enormous development of the field of
genetics in the past two decades the appearance of genetic counselling. There can’t be
much doubt that in genetic counselling, too, this same assumption operates. Of course,
the theory is that the mother should be given the information and then left to make up

5

her own mind. The role of the doctor involved is that of a neutral purveyor of facts
rather than directing her towards any particular decision. I doubt if this distinction is
real, since no presentation of facts is value-free and the so-called neutral party can
always, by the facts he chooses to relay and the emphasis he places upon them,
manipulate effectively the decision arrived at. Consider for a moment the following.
The father is a drunkard and probably has syphilis. The mother has tuberculosis. They
have had one child, it died after only six days. The mother is pregnant with her second
child. Imagine that the parents are willing to have an abortion if so advised or
counselled. When a teacher gave these facts to his class in medical school, most
students voted in favour of abortion. The teacher then broke the news. The second
child was Ludwig van Beethoven. It is hard not to be bowled over by such a
remarkable example. None the less, few would suggest that this ethical assumption
concerning a minimum quality of life is wholly wrong or ought to be abandoned. But,
quite apart from its clear lack of definition, it is important to notice the eugenic tone
which underlies it.
There is perhaps some moral danger in following a path which has it that the
handicapped should not be born. Though we all want healthy children, health, as we
know, is a term which defies easy definition and who is to say along what point of the
scale of handicap a baby’s life would not be worth living? Furthermore, such a pursuit
of the handicap-free child might inevitably make us less tolerant of that child who, for
whatever reason, is not caught by the screening process. Is such a child to face a
future as a freak or a reject, shunned because such children are just not born like that
any more?
Again, there is some ambivalence in medical attitude and practice in this context.
Those doctors who refuse to perform an abortion in which the child is genetically
disabled also claim that they are concerned only with the child’s best interests. But to
them there is no minimum quality to a child’s life. Only in such a way, they seem to
argue, can we remain a caring society rather than a selfish and narcissistic one which
only wants babies if they are made in the right image. Existence is all, a view shared
by those doctors who advocate that severely handicapped newly born babies should
be helped to live rather than encouraged to die. But even these doctors might perform
an abortion for a girl who had been horribly raped or draw the line at treating the most
severely handicapped newly born baby. So their position is not free from
ambivalence.
These issues concerning a minimum quality of life are profoundly difficult. What is
striking is that despite their significance they are not widely discussed. They are
resolved in the consulting-room and debated, if at all, in the medical journals. But, as
you have seen, the ethical assumption that there is a certain minimum quality of life,
is unclear. The counter-principle that there is no minimum quality of life co-exists
with it, again with no clear meaning or clue as to when one rather than the other
should operate, producing ambivalence and contradiction.
A third ethical assumption, I suggest, is that a child has a certain worth, socially and
economically, and should be conceived or born only if it would qualify as worth it.
This is most evident in the case of abortion, when a doctor may find himself asked to
certify that the birth of a child will be a detriment to the existing family’s health. Here
the word ‘health’ can be manipulated if need be to include the threat to the health of

6

existing children represented by additional competition for the available resources of
the family. Here, the underlying concern may be, as in the other cases, for the child
about to be born, that he is better off not born. But there seems to be an equal concern
for those children already born. Those who oppose abortion are particularly concerned
about the extent to which this criterion is capable of being manipulated. It means that
the decision whether a child should be born may be made to depend on the social
convenience of the birth. But to argue otherwise is to say that the child should be born
even though it would not be welcome. Despite the complexity of the argument and the
conflict of principles we can once again find doctors making decisions, giving advice,
as if what was involved was a mere matter of technical expertise. Any ethical analysis
which is indulged in is rudimentary at best and not exposed to wider scrutiny. Indeed,
recently, doctors specialising in the field of genetics have found themselves more and
more parlayed into these ethical difficulties. Through the development of foetal
screening they have been able to discover more and more about the foetus so as to aid
the parents in deciding what course to take. Now comes the problem. What if a doctor
knows that Mr and Mrs X want desperately to have a baby boy. In the course of
routine screening, he discovers the foetus Mrs X is carrying is healthy but a female.
Doctors have got themselves into a considerable lather about whether or not the
parents should be told this, when it is likely, in our chosen hypothesis, that the mother
will then have the foetus aborted.
The doctor may not regard the information as relevant to any decision the parents may
wish to make. But, by defining what is relevant, the doctor is already making the
ethical decision that only certain information should be revealed and that he should be
the sole judge of this. To lie, to withhold the information or to reveal it; each is
equally repugnant to many doctors. This is, if you will, another example of the
dilemmas medical technology brings in its wake. We must, it is clear, flush out these
ethical problems associated with medicine at the beginning of life. They affect our
future, they are ours to resolve.
So let me tie up the various threads of my argument. We have seen how decisions
made by doctors are ethical in nature, calling for careful analysis. There is no
evidence that such analysis is engaged in. If, for instance, you look to the recently
revised Handbook of Medical Ethics produced by the British Medical Association for
wise words and advice, you will be disappointed. For example, the section on the
treatment of severely handicapped children ends in the ringing phrase, ‘the doctor
must find a just and humane solution for the infant and the family’. So far, so good,
but just what is a just solution? To argue, as some doctors do, that ‘we learn on the
job’, is to support some notion of education by osmosis, or to say that they perpetuate,
unconsidered, the views of their predecessors or to admit that they receive no
education at all in ethics.
We should expect not only some regularity if not uniformity in the decisions arrived
at but also some conformity between these decisions and those which the rest of us
might take. We should also expect that doctors have some educational grounding in
ethical analysis. To suggest this last crucial point is to invite scorn. ‘There is no room
in the curriculum. We don’t want to clutter up our timetable with well-meaning
Sunday school exercises.’ My response is that much greater stress must be laid on the
humanities during a doctor’s training. Ethics must be a central course, taught not by
some superannuated elder statesman nor by the latest medical star in the firmament,

7

but by an outsider, someone who is not deafened by the rhetoric of medicine. Medical
schools must simply be dragged back into our world and out of their hermetically
sealed cocoon in which we are counters with which the game of life is played. The
principles by reference to which doctors act must be the product of general discussion
and debate. We must take over. It may be that, in large part, we as laymen would
endorse many of the decisions taken by doctors. But it is over- - weaning hubris to
deny us the opportunity to consider them first and to insist, and I repeat insist, on
occasion that our views rather than theirs prevail.

8

