REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 2: Plausibility and Horror
TRANSMISSION: 18 November 1981 – Radio 4

I remarked in my first lecture that the centre- piece of the contemporary strategic
scene is something called nuclear deterrence. Many who find this doctrine alarming
draw comfort from the Strategic Arms Limitation talks and the so-called SALT
agreements that resulted. They must have received a bit of a shock, however, if they
ever read the best-known account of the first SALT talks, written by Mr John
Newhouse, a former official in the United States Arms Control Agency. Mr
Newhouse, a great admirer of Dr Kissinger and his achievement of a SALT treaty,
suggests that the underlying principle of the exercise was: ‘Killing people is good;
killing weapons is bad.’
This judgment, flippantly expressed, is deadly serious—in the literal meaning of that
phrase. It moderates somewhat one’s enthusiasm for a process of arms control that
seeks to perpetuate such a system. Of course, Mr Newhouse doesn’t really mean that
killing people is good; he means that threatening to kill them is good, because he
believes that such a threat will deter a nuclear attack on anyone with an obvious
capacity to retaliate. Why does he think ‘killing weapons’ is bad? Because they might
be the very weapons needed to kill the people, and their destruction might thereby
undermine deterrence. The idea of mutual, mass, killing, is, he hopes, unthinkable.
Attacking weapons is not unthinkable, and by opening up the idea of nuclear attacks
that are not immediately and utterly catastrophic, it falls into the category of what are
often labelled ‘war fighting strategies’. Because these strategies suggest ways of
actually using nuclear weapons they alarm many people, who condemn the very idea
as ‘making the world safe for nuclear war’.
For all that, not many people can feel very happy about an alternative based on the
idea that killing people is good. This is perhaps the classic notion of nuclear
deterrence, which I briefly discussed in my first lecture. When, before the ashes of
Japan were cold, the earliest thinkers about nuclear war hit on the idea that, if there
was no effective defence against nuclear attack and if you didn’t wish to base your
security on luck or on the forbearance of potential enemies, you had to rely on the
threat of retaliation in kind, they all thought in terms of what came to be called ‘citybusting’. Why this was so is uncertain. Perhaps it was instinctively felt, contrary to
lots of evidence, that there is nothing governments cherish more than their people.
Perhaps it was the consequence of most long-range bombing having been of the
indiscriminate city-busting kind in the recently ended war, simply because of inability
to do any better at a time when less than a fifth of RAF bombs fell within five miles
of the target. Even with atomic weapons, the scarcity of bombs, the limitations of
aircraft and the erroneously predicted inaccuracy of ballistic missiles made it
reasonable to suspect that in a future war there would not be much choice about what
to use as a target. There was certainly no serious psycho-political analysis of what it
takes to deter.

1

The classic view of deterrence has a supposed advantage, alluded to by Mr
Newhouse. As there is only a finite number of cities, the location of which is very
well known, destroying them may be supposed to require only a finite number of
nuclear weapons. If all nuclear powers would agree only to shoot at cities, there
would be no need to multiply and refine long-range nuclear weapons. Rational
governments would thus have no incentive either to launch a nuclear attack or to start
a so- called arms race. So convinced of the efficacy of this strategy were—and still
are —its architects that they both encouraged the Soviet Union to adopt it, and
condemned any Western measures that might impede the Soviet capacity to destroy
Western cities. The capability for ‘assured destruction’ would be mutual, producing
the doctrine now known to friends and foes alike by the ironic acronym MAD—
Mutual Assured Destruction.
This doctrine, however, has several increasingly apparent flaws. In the first place a
doctrine of mutual deterrence implemented in this way requires nations to live for the
rest of history with their survival entirely dependent on the good sense and restraint of
their opposite numbers. Such a system seems unlikely to be one conducive to a
relaxed international environment. A sudden change in government, an unexpectedly
severe crisis, may overturn all expectations. Rich and inventive nations will surely be
continually tempted to search for technical or doctrinal ways of reasserting greater
control over their fate.
In fact, some such ways have already been discovered. The evolution of defences
against ballistic missiles aroused a flurry of interest in the Sixties and research
continues; new ideas about lasers and other energy beams engender excitement about
defences in the medium term future; spectacular improvements in missile accuracy
and the multiplication of re-entry vehicles have reversed the arithmetic of offensive
missiles, so that the odds now favour the several incoming warheads against the single
missile in its launcher—and all of this begins to put a question-mark against the
fundamental assumption of inevitable vulnerability. We may doubt whether the
defence will ever master the attack by, purely technical means, now that the
destructive power of the atom has been unleashed, if only because destruction seems
to be inherently easier than creation. A toddler with a box of matches and a bit of luck
could raze Versailles. But the combination of technique and doctrine is opening up a
variety of at least conceivable defensive strategies. I pointed out in my first lecture
that some deterrent postures in the pre-nuclear past had been undermined by the
aggressor’s conviction that he had hit upon a clever plan to avoid the full
consequences of his aggression. In recent years technological advances have offered
at least a glimmer of plans to avoid the full force of nuclear retaliation. Yet to cut off
such strategies by agreeing not to exploit the technologies in question was one of the
primary purposes of the SALT negotiations.
Many people hoped that the willingness of the Soviet Union to enter the SALT
process and to accept the treaty banning ballistic missile defence proved that the
Russians endorsed the idea of strategic stability based on mutual assured destruction.
It now seems much more likely, however, that the Soviet Union gave up ballistic
missile defence because its own system was proving disappointing and the United
States appeared to be on the verge of a more promising breakthrough. There has never
been much reason to believe the Soviet Union liked the idea of its own vulnerability.

2

It goes against the whole grain of historic Soviet—that is to say, Russian combined
with Bolshevik—philosophy of foreign and defence policy to lay their homeland open
to enemies and rely merely on their forbearance. Nor, indeed in the nuclear age, has
the Soviet Union shown any inclination to regard population as a preferred target, or
nuclear war as a mere spasm of mutual annihilation. True that, once Mr Khruschev
had broken the intellectual legacy of Stalin, the Russians very sensibly admitted that
nuclear war might lead to the destruction of the leading socialist state and that war
between the Great Powers should therefore no longer be regarded as a necessary step
in the extension of socialism. Nuclear war should certainly be avoided. But Soviet
spokesmen have always made it plain that, should nuclear war come, the Soviet
Union would wage it so as to minimise damage to themselves, so as to ‘prevail’, and
ensure the survival of as much as possible of the Soviet centres of power. The point is
well put in an article by Mr David Holloway, an expert on the Soviet Union and,
incidentally, by far the ablest contributor, in my view, to Mr E. P. Thompson’s wellknown book Protest and Survive. As Mr Holloway puts the Soviet outlook: ‘If
deterrence is not seen as foolproof, it makes sense to pay attention to how a nuclear
war would be fought and how the survival of the state could best be assured in the
event of such a war. In this context, victory retains significance as a concept: it is
certainly to be striven for if war breaks out...’
Some experts who have noted this perverse Soviet refusal to stop thinking about what
would happen if a nuclear war actually broke out have presented their discovery in
ways that encourage the impression—particularly among those who do not read
beyond titles—that the Soviet Union might think it worth while to start a large-scale
nuclear war deliberately in order to crush the West. Perhaps the best-known of these
writings was the article by Professor Richard Pipes of Harvard entitled ‘Why the
Soviet Union Thinks It Could Fight and Win a Nuclear War’. The significance of this
piece is enhanced for some by the fact that Professor Pipes is now -a member of
President Reagan’s national security staff. But a closer study of such writings makes it
clear that the Soviet Union is extremely anxious to avoid a nuclear war and is
certainly not working towards ‘Der Tag’ —the day when it, will be launched.
What is also clear, however, is that Soviet strategists, unlike many Western exponents
of deterrence, refuse to regard the outbreak of nuclear war as an impenetrable veil
beyond which thought and planning should not venture. Rather, they regard nuclear
war as a highly dangerous possibility which might nevertheless occur. Should it
happen, they think it worth preparing to do better rather than worse. Against that
eventuality the Soviet Union has therefore provided itself with a formidable array of
well-adapted weapons and never suggests that these are in any sense ‘unusable’.
It seems clear that the Russians would be loath to endorse Mr Newhouse’s aphorism
that killing people is good. Indeed, before it became convenient for the Soviet Union
to sign the treaty banning ballistic missile defences, the then Soviet Premier, Mr
Kosygin, delivered some explicit and telling condemnations of the alleged American
proclivity for planning to kill people while the Soviet Union concentrated on
defending them. The current sharp debate about the future of Western nuclear strategy
could not unfairly be described as a struggle over whether to persist in trying to
educate the Russians in the virtues of assured destruction or to learn from them
instead and adopt a more ‘traditional’ concept for nuclear strategy.

3

One reason for concern is, of course, the fear that, if the Soviet Union has a
conception of how to fight a nuclear war to some outcome that can be called
‘prevailing’, while we only think of it as the end of the world, the Soviet Union may
have a decided bargaining advantage in extreme crisis. The possibility that the Soviet
Union has acquired the ability to eliminate the American land-based missile forces, so
as to leave a weakened United States with no retaliatory option that would be better
than surrender, is merely the immediate form of a more general anxiety.
There is, however, another reason for misgivings about an American strategy of
assured destruction; a reason that goes back to another of the flaws in the original
doctrine of deterrence that I identified last time. The early architects of deterrence
seem to have been so preoccupied with staving off a massive nuclear attack that they
gave very little thought to why it might occur. Otherwise they would have been
quicker to recall that armed forces have traditionally been maintained not merely to
stave off threats to the very existence of the state but also for protecting a variety of
lesser interests and exerting political pressure on others.
The pure doctrine of mutual deterrence by mutual assured destruction implies a set of
stalemates and the effective paralysis of nuclear forces. As there is no reason to
anticipate the cessation of political conflict, the consequence is, as I said last week,
either that states will continue to use the more familiar forms of military power under
the umbrella of nuclear paralysis or the paralysis will not be complete and states will
invent, perhaps just stumble on, ways to use nuclear weapons to pursue political
conflict. Much post-war strategic debate has been in essence an exploration of these
two possibilities.
They are naturally possibilities of the greatest possible interest to NATO, which has
come to rely on the United States initiating the use of nuclear weapons if deterrence
fails and conventional defences collapse. So long as the United States enjoyed a
virtual nuclear monopoly it was possible to invoke the threat of all-out nuclear war—
so-called Massive Retaliation —even for contingencies that did not threaten the
security of the United States itself. This was the idea summed up in one of my
favourite phrases from the mouth of the late Chief of the Air Staff, Sir John Slessor:
‘The dog that we keep to take care of the cat can also take care of the kittens’. I don’t,
in fact, believe that many Western statesmen ever thought it was that simple, but
undoubtedly the general sense of superiority made it easier to live with the theoretical
need to strike first.
Once it was clear that the cat that the Soviet Union was rearing was going to be a
tiger, the easy appeal went out of the metaphor. In a crisis, the United States might
now face the dilemma characterised by President Kennedy as ‘Holocaust or
Humiliation’. An eager search for theories of limited war began: one led to the build
up of conventional forces for the flexible response in Europe which NATO still
espouses; another theory led to the fashion for counter-insurgency and, by way of
that, to the fiasco in Vietnam. I would like to look at some of the debris of those two
theories in my next two lectures.
But already in the Sixties there was thought of using the large, intercontinental
weapons in limited ways. In famous addresses, a secret one to his NATO colleagues
in Athens and a public one at the University of Michigan in 1962, President

4

Kennedy’s Secretary of Defence, Robert McNamara, expounded a doctrine of
controlled response: going after Soviet missiles while sparing Soviet cities as hostages
against Soviet retaliation on the American population. McNamara soon abandoned
this idea and turned to assured destruction, partly because it was proving
impracticable to knock out the growing Soviet missile force with the technology then
available but more because he feared the American armed services would have an
excuse for an upward spiral of expenditure.
In the last few years, however, the idea of limited nuclear wars—what are called
limited nuclear options—has come to the forefront of debate again. This debate is
significant not merely for some immediately pressing problems of the Western
alliance but also for the longer-term future of strategic theory.
The two things that have done most to reawaken the debate are the now unmistakable
scale of Soviet nuclear armament, dramatised and authenticated, as it were, in the
SALT negotiations, and the recent dramatic refinement of nuclear delivery systems.
At the outset, you recall, the case for making cities the prime targets rested in large
part on the inability to hit anything else. In reality, the American and later the British
armed forces always had a set of more specific industrial and military targets in mind
and these target lists were elaborated during the McNamara phase of enchantment
with controlled response. But the nature of the targets and the weapons meant that the
difference was apparent rather than real: very large numbers of Soviet citizens would
have been killed and this was an accepted and very largely welcome feature of the
plan.
Today, the accuracy of missiles opens the possibility of much more discriminating
attacks. It is therefore possible to conceive theoretically of an attack on a few Soviet
targets, sufficiently limited to leave the Soviet Union overwhelming incentive not to
respond by initiating the city-busting war but sufficiently valuable to make it desist,
for instance, from a successful invasion of Western Europe. As with all deterrent
strategies, the preferred purpose of such a plan would not be to execute it, but, by
letting it become known, to deter the aggression that would provoke its
implementation.
These are not just the idle speculations of ivory tower strategists. They are the ideas
toward which, with the general approval of its allies, several successive United States
administrations have been moving. Beginning with Dr James Schlesinger, Secretary
of Defence under Nixon and Ford, continuing under President Carter with the much
publicised Presidential Directive 59, PD 59, and now - -under President Reagan,
limited nuclear attacks with long-range nuclear weapons upon Soviet forces and even
on Soviet territory have become a recognised possible component of American
strategy.
These developments greatly alarm many who regard them as in the vein of ‘making
the world safe for nuclear war’. President Brezhnev, who is intended to be deterred by
such talk, naturally scoffs. Just over a year ago, for instance, he declared that
‘statements about alleged limited and partial use of nuclear weapons have nothing in
common with reality’. So what are we to make of it all?

5

I start from the belief that we cannot escape the question by the total abolition of
nuclear weapons. The problems of arms control are too extensive to discuss now and I
will return to them in my penultimate lecture. Suffice it to say now that, leaving aside
the prospect of whatever more traditional forms of warfare might break out in a
denuclearised world, the problems of verification and control entailed in schemes of
far-reaching disarmament appear insurmountable. Assuming that the abandonment of
all capacity for self- defence will not appeal to the majority, I am left with the
conclusion that some element of nuclear deterrence will remain a feature of the
strategic scene.
If that is to be so, I hope it isn’t just a professional deformation of perception
contracted from excessive exposure to strategic theory that makes me feel uneasy
about the idea of having no ideas about the use of nuclear weapons beyond
threatening to kill as many people as possible because that is cheap and easy.
In all efforts to deter by the prospect of retaliation I think one must grapple with a
continuum of threats, the opposite poles of which I think of as Plausibility and Horror.
That is to say, we have to choose between trying to deter by making lesser threats,
which by reason of being lesser, are rather credible, or by uttering dire threats, which,
though implausible because of their awful consequences, are for the very same reason
quite daunting—provided of course we have some known means of executing them.
So far, the nuclear powers have exercised great caution in confrontations with each
other. Apparently, even a rather vaguely diffused fear of nuclear war is a powerful
force for moderation in crises. But thinking, as we must, of a world that will probably
come to contain an increasing number of nuclear powers, of a world in which serious
and unpredictable crises will doubtless occur, a world which may even have
experienced further uses of nuclear weapons to break the taboo observed since 1945,
it would be irresponsible not to have plans for trying to limit the damage once nuclear
weapons are used. So long as there is deterrence there is no denying it may fail.
In the specific contemporary case of the Western alliance, there are particular reasons
for thinking more seriously about what would happen if deterrence did fail. To have
no vision other than immediate mutual annihilation must surely sap confidence and
cohesion in crisis. Given Europe’s present dependence on American guarantees it
must be divisive, as we can see in the current cruise-missile dispute, if all the efforts
to build ‘flexibility’ into response are in the area of theatre conflict, while
intercontinental war remains a no-go area. Nor can we ignore the apparent Soviet
interest in efforts to improve the outcome of nuclear wars. For, while enemies are
fought on one’s own best strategic judgment, they are deterred in terms of their own
strategic assumptions, by military doctrines and postures that are impressive by their
standards.
Now, a frequent objection to preparations for fighting nuclear wars short of a simple
orgy of mutual destruction is that they would encourage an arms race. It is true that
the facile notion of ‘overkill’ has arisen in the context of planning simply to kill
undefended people. Subtler strategies demand more careful analysis of the forces
required. In reality, of course, even attacks on cities depend for certainty on a
complex set of assumptions about the reliability and vulnerability of weapons and
about a wide range of conceivable measures to minimise damage. Shifting the initial

6

focus to more limited, probably military targets, need not greatly aggravate the
problem. There is, for instance, no need to include enemy missiles in the target plan of
a limited nuclear strike and several good reasons not to do so, particularly the need to
avoid provoking a precipitate response on the well-known strategist’s principle of ‘if
you’re going to lose it, use it’.
The more plausible strategies of limited nuclear war envisage such targets as oil
refineries, communications or conventional military installations. Targets of this kind
are almost as ‘finite’ as the cities and, in any case, no more than a few could be
attacked with much reasonable expectation of continued limitation. Multiplication of
weapons is thus not a prerequisite for limited nuclear strategies and there are in any
case, as I argued last time, many competing demands both military and civilian to
limit the share of national resources devoted to nuclear weapons.
But once more let me make myself quite clear. I believe the modification of concepts
of nuclear deterrence involves important issues that should be better understood and
that the outcome of the debate will have a fundamental effect on the future military
scene. Like all nuclear deterrence strategies, the idea of limited nuclear options is
intended not to fight war but to deter aggression and thereby avert war. Nevertheless I
do not pretend to any excessive confidence in the idea.
For one thing, control would be far from easy. It would be unforgivable to pretend
that a limited nuclear war would be very limited by commonsense standards, unless a
single demonstrative weapon is envisaged. For instance, an attack on the Baku
oilfields in the Caucasus, trying to minimise casualties, is estimated to entail 200,000
Russian deaths and 750,000 injuries. A Soviet attack on the American land-based
missile force might hold casualties down to 300,000-800,000 deaths. Although these
numbers are much, much lower than the tens of millions of deaths deliberately sought
by strategies of assured destruction they are still horrific. Moreover, the low estimates
are optimistic, because there are so many uncertainties about the effects of nuclear
weapons. These can vary wildly according to weapon performance, weather, season
and the degree of protection enjoyed, perhaps accidentally, by the population. The
worst estimate for an attack on the American missiles is around 20 million dead.
Some of the nuclear effects, like electro-magnetic pulse, may damage the very
communications with which we hope the enemy will exercise his restraint.
So I conclude from all this that limited nuclear options are a dreadfully dangerous
idea: a two-edged sword indeed. If such an option is ever implemented we shall be in
a desperate plight. But for this very reason I don’t believe such strategies ‘make the
world safe for nuclear war’. Quite enough horror, quite enough suffused fear of
holocaust, would survive to inculcate caution, while the consequences of the failure of
deterrence might, might be infinitely preferable to those entailed by assured
destruction. So I see the limited options as a few added stopping-places, none too
hopeful but very much needed stopping-places, on the dreadful escalatory slope.
A question remains: would the Soviet Union play this game? They usually say ‘No.
But their interest, their constantly1 reiterated assertion that war must be wielded as an
instrument of policy, the high value they place on survival of Soviet power, all this
gives them a strong incentive to keep the course of a war under control if it comes,
while the technical apparatus of command and control with which they1 have

7

provided themselves suggests a strong determination to retain the discretion of the
high command.
Controlled strategies that avoid killing people as a matter of principle, even though
they may be killed inadvertently, would also be less incompatible with, might indeed
be greatly facilitated by, the evolution of effective technical means of strategic
defence. As the Russians used to insist, money spent on defensive weapons seems
inherently preferable to that spent on offence, once you realise that one competes with
the other within defence budgets that do have limits, however high.
Naturally, I realise that the very idea of maintaining forces that could kill millions is
repugnant on moral grounds. Morality is not readily quantified, but most of us seem to
feel Hitler was all the worse because it was six million rather than six. Can any
strategy be justified that requires even a conditional readiness to kill or risk killing
very large numbers of people?
I do not rate myself very highly as a moralist and I will not argue with anyone who
professes an aversion to any kind of warfare at all, although I have some doubt about
the success of such people in ordering their whole life in a manner wholly consistent
with that principle. Others, however, who won’t go that far feel there is something
special about the potential destructiveness of nuclear war and cannot imagine any
political purpose that could make recourse to it worth while. Such a war breaches the
notion of proportionality that seems to pervade most of our thinking about
justifiability in conflict.
To this I would reply, with some trepidation that, if I take what I believe to be a
Protestant Christian view, I do not expect to find a politically practical course of
action that is without a degree of sinfulness. I can only try to select the least sinful of
the courses open to me, never forgetting, however, that it is not rendered blemishless
merely because it is the best that I can do.
But because nuclear weapons exist and cannot be eliminated—at the very least the
knowledge of how to make them can never be erased—I don’t believe that any policy
can provide an absolute assurance that it will not lead to nuclear war. As the 1930s
illustrated, even policies of military neglect and diplomatic self-abnegation can later
be accused by history of complicity in causing wars. Consequently, I believe we do
not have the luxury of choosing a policy, wholly untainted by the nuclear danger. We
can only choose between policies that entail different degrees of risk.
I can therefore see no absolute moral bar to the policies that strategic and political
analysis lead me to think have the best chance of averting catastrophe. As far as I can
see, a policy of sustained nuclear deterrence, combined with efforts to extend
responsible political control, over military action both before and after war breaks out,
has as good a chance as many strategies, and better than most, for preventing nuclear
war. In the meantime, it can make a useful contribution to preserving other Western
interests. Moreover, I believe that the validity of this conception is not confined to the
West and that combining the traditional logic of strategy in this way with the new and
revolutionary technology produces prudent rules of general application.

8

I recognise, of course, that today’s strategic thinking is time and culture-bound. Even
if it is adequate now I do not doubt that technological and political change will
demand fresh strategic speculation and new security policies. I shall be very much
surprised; however, if it ever comes to seem wise to observe such a sharp distinction
between nuclear deterrence and the more traditional realms of strategy as the
advocates of Mutual Assured Destruction have attempted to do. Indeed, as I intend to
argue next week, nuclear deterrence depends on much more than nuclear weapons: on
the proper marriage of those weapons to the infrastructure of military and political
power.

9

