REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 1: If You Knows of a Better 'ole
TRANSMISSION: 11 November 1981 – Radio 4

Armed force is the ultimate tool of political conflict. It is therefore not surprising that
military affairs often arouse bitter controversy. Perhaps the only uncontroversial
observation I shall manage to make during this series of lectures—though it is by no
means my aim to raise the temperature of debate—is to assert the supreme importance
of averting all-out nuclear war. The problem is how to do it. Wars kill people and ruin
countries. Nuclear wars could kill unprecedented numbers of people. Some nuclear
strategies, the one called ‘assured destruction’, for example, which is enshrined in the
Strategic Arms Limitation agreements and, ironically, much favoured by some of the
keener advocates of arms control, such strategies are actually designed to produce
casualties of some 75 to 100 million on each side. Lesser nuclear wars are envisaged
that might kill ‘no more than’ a few million; even, perhaps, ‘only’ a few hundred
thousand. Some point out that this would be no more than was suffered in many wars
of the past—but these nuclear casualties would be incurred in a flash, with vast
reserves of destructive power looming, unused, over the battlefield under
circumstances scarcely calculated to encourage confidence in control and moderation.
Nuclear war would thus, I believe, be a truly new phenomenon, and those who write
articles on the subject under such titles as ‘Victory is Possible’, as some have recently
- should, I think, find a different vocabulary to discuss such an unprecedented and illunderstood prospect.
I do not believe, however, that it is enough to make a simple renunciation of nuclear
weapons, and that for two reasons. In the first place, important though it is to avoid
nuclear war, that is not the only purpose of a national security policy. It is possible to
design strategies that offer a fair prospect of avoiding both nuclear war and many
other unfavourable outcomes to International conflict—not falling, for instance, under
the dominant influence of Soviet power.
In the second place, I do not believe that there is any infallible way to avoid nuclear
war, even at any political price, now that the weapons have been invented. Experience
should have taught us the difficulty of translating personal preferences for just and
equitable outcomes into practical politics. I find it surprising that those who daily
observe our incapacity to do much effectively about the chronic unproductive
quarrelsomeness of British industry can with such apparent complete confidence
advance panaceas for the age-long phenomenon of international conflict and the
immensely complicated problems of nuclear strategy. I must confess at the outset that
I, at least, have no such complete assurance about the prescriptions that are, on
balance, the best I can discover.
Beyond doubt, armed force is a dangerous tool, a ‘two-edged sword’, as likely to cut a
careless master as his intended victim. The Western democracies are naturally averse
to war. Preparation for war, still more war itself, are ill-suited to societies preoccupied

1

with material welfare and by no means all hankering for a military life. For at least
three centuries, one school of Western thought has hoped that modern ways for man
to enrich himself by trade and industry would make war obsolete. The potential
destructiveness of nuclear weapons led President Eisenhower to his famous remark
that there is no alternative to peace, but this sentiment is far from wholly novel. Even
before the First World War there were voices prophesying devastation on an
unprecedented, society- destroying scale and, certainly, few belligerents in either
world war emerged with anything much resembling the aspirations with which they
entered. Society reconciled itself to its sacrifices chiefly by supposing that it was for
the last time, and it was perhaps natural that it was a writer fascinated by conflict and
by the potential of technology, H. G. Wells, who conceived the idea that the Great
War was the war to end war.
We now know all too well that it wasn’t. A glance round the world shows that war
and armed force are far from out of fashion. It is endemic in the Third World, which
is full of satisfied users: the rulers of recently reunited Vietnam, Tanzania, India,
Israel, Egypt and Mr Mugabe, all can point to a positive balance sheet. The Great
Powers are active there too. Recent studies by the Brookings Institution in
Washington show that, besides the two large wars in Korea and Vietnam, the United
States has exercised its military power in over 200 incidents since 1945, while the
Soviet Union has done the same on a little under 200 occasions.
The lesser Great Powers, like Britain, France and Japan, now dwarfed by the
Superpowers around which they chiefly huddle, constitute a zone conspicuous by the
absence of much recent warfare.
This is not evidence of the irrelevance of armed force, however, but of the aura of
deterrence established by the Superpowers. Armed force is not the less effective for
being latent in such situations. The post-war era of reconstruction and of economic
boom may have exaggerated the potential of economic power as a rival to armed
force; indeed, the former Japanese Prime Minister, Mr Sato, once boasted that his
country was a ‘civilianised’ Great Power. But the panic with which Japanese
statesmen greet American expressions of weariness with their protective role reveals
how far this illusion has been fostered only within a military balance sustained by
others.
The prescription which is thought by many to have created this equilibrium and the
peace within the developed world, and to provide a brooding, monitoring shadow over
the whole strategic globe, that prescription is ‘nuclear deterrence’.
There was a time, not so long ago, when this concept was pretty generally regarded as
the crowning achievement of post-war strategic thought. The writings of such
exponents as Henry Kissinger and Herman Kahn became set books for college
examinations. More recently, reflection has suggested that it is better to let such
works run the test of time, like Bolingbroke, Burke or Hume, and that the celebration
may have been a trifle premature; for it is becoming apparent that in its classic form,
at least, the theory of nuclear deterrence has severe limitations.
The essence of nuclear deterrence—to which I will return in more detail next week—
is that because there is no effective defence against nuclear attack, security can only

2

be based on an unquestionable capacity and intention to retaliate in kind. In
Churchill’s now hackneyed phrase, safety was to be the sturdy child of terror.
Now, there is nothing new about the idea of deterrence; the obvious ability to defeat
an attack is a natural way to discourage its initiation. It is not even necessary to
threaten defeat. Dr Jonathan Steinberg has illustrated how, at the turn of the century,
Admiral Tirpitz’s inferior German navy, by threatening the Royal Navy with more
damage than it could afford to accept even for victory, was, as the title of Dr
Steinberg’s book has it, ‘yesterday’s deterrent’. In much the same way the armed
neutralities of Sweden and Switzerland are long- established examples of security
sought by confronting a would-be aggressor, not with defeat, but with the prospect of
higher costs than the prize is worth.
As we know, such strategies of deterrence have been tried before and have not always
worked—it didn’t work for Tirpitz —so why do people pin so much faith on nuclear
deterrence? The answer lies in the supposed potential scale of the costs and the
certainty of incurring them.
When Germany entered the two world wars the possible high price of modern war
was well known, but in each case German strategists believed that they had hit on a
plan to win cheaply and avoid the consequences: I mean, of course, the Schlieffen
Plan and the tactics of Blitzkrieg. Today it is thought that nuclear weapons, in the
absence of effective active or passive defences, prevent such delusions. It can be
made clear beyond doubt that a nuclear power can wreak what we have come to call
‘assured destruction’ on an aggressor. Faith in this defensive posture has become so
complete in some quarters that it has been thought our duty to persuade the Soviet
Union of its interest in threatening unacceptable damage to the West and even to help
it achieve the capacity to do so. Dr Jerome Kahan, for example, one of Dr Kissinger’s
agents in the negotiation of the SALT treaties and one of the purest propounders of
their principles, warns us against what he called ‘anything that would threaten or
appear to threaten the Soviet Union’s retaliatory capability’. Thus ‘assured
destruction’ should be mutual, mutual assured destruction - MAD in the notorious
acronym—and safety should be based on what has been cynically termed ‘assured
vulnerability’.
Unhappily—if that’s the word—it is increasingly clear that this doctrine has serious
and probably fatal flaws. At the very least, mutual vulnerability to massive destruction
is an uncomfortable thing on which to base survival. One full-scale failure could be
enough to destroy society as we know it, though my friends who are scientists tell me
the global desert envisioned in Nevil Shute’s novel, On the Beach, is not probable.
Men must surely keep trying to escape from such a threat of destruction if ever
doctrine or technology holds out hope; yet efforts to escape strike at the roots of the
theory of assured destruction.
Moreover, if the doctrine of mutual assured destruction is adopted in its full- fledged
form, it promises a degree of strategic paralysis. Nuclear forces would become good
only for neutralising other nuclear forces. Yet great powers have important interests
other than just not being annihilated, and have traditionally used armed force to
pursue them. States seek ways to link military power to political purposes. So either
nuclear weapons will be invoked, if only as an ominous, blackmailing shadow in
political disputes, or, if these weapons are utterly emasculated by deterrence, there

3

could be a reversion to the uninhibited play of more traditional forms of armed force
and conflict.
Thus the doctrine of deterrence by assured destruction can be relied upon to neutralise
neither nuclear nor conventional arms, while its own mechanisms are subject to
change as politics and science inexorably alter the context. Hence, arise, I believe, the
emerging controversies over theatre nuclear weapons, limited nuclear options, and all
the currency of contemporary strategic debate.
The horrible potential of nuclear weapons and the faulty nature of what we might call
the ‘strategic’ solutions to the problem have bred unprecedented enthusiasm for trying
to abolish armed force or its components. It is not surprising that the innovations with
which the strategists have tried to shore up the framework of security have become
particular targets for keen disarmers. Unfortunately, the approach to the problem from
the perspective of disarmament and arms control—which I shall look at more closely
in my penultimate lecture—is equally flawed.
The difficulty of abolishing or even reducing or controlling the weapons possessed by
hostile or merely nervous opposing sets of states is well documented, and there is not
time now to rehearse the obstacles to defining balances and verifying outcomes.
Suffice it to say that despair about the complexity of designing and phasing partial
agreements has sometimes prompted proposals to make a dash for so-called General
and Complete Disarmament—GCD—within a few years. Such an idea is utopian, if
only because the framework of most modern societies requires more organised
coercive police force for domestic purposes than neighbouring states could
contemplate with equanimity, because rearmament could never be wholly precluded,
and because, especially in a nuclear age, illicitly concealed nuclear stockpiles, too
small for discovery by inspection, could nevertheless prove decisive when revealed or
used. Serious studies make it clear that General and Complete Disarmament demands
world government, and even that would merely transform the problem into one of
preventing civil war within the new world state.
These difficulties and the lack of success in early post-war disarmament efforts,
dramatised around 1960 by the development by both the United States and the Soviet
Union of General and Complete Disarmament plans of patent insincerity, brought
classical notions of disarmament to a low ebb. This predicament doubtless did much
to inspire the conception, about that time, of the much more promising notion of arms
control.
The original essence of that much abused term was an acceptance that armed force
was not going to disappear and that progress would only be made by ceasing to
deplore its existence and seeking instead to manage it so as to increase the chances
that it would at least not produce unintended and uncontrollable effects.
It was and is an essential element in the conception of arms control that the goal of
harnessing armed force to rational and non-catastrophic purposes could be pursued by
unilateral measures as well as by negotiated agreements, by carefully designing armed
forces so as, for instance, to prevent unauthorised or accidental acts. If common
ground could be identified between states and made the basis for mutually reassuring
agreements, tacit or explicit, so much the better. Such policies might not necessarily,
it should be noted, result in fewer weapons or lower costs. Because of its

4

invulnerability, the Polaris- type submarine-based missile system, for example, is
generally regarded as a valuable contribution to several forms of strategic stability,
but it was an innovation once, and is far from cheap.
It is, I believe, a great tragedy that the concept of arms control, which embraces these
modest but intensely practical approaches to moderating the role of armed force in the
world, has in recent years been perverted and invested with many of the illusions that
bedevilled the idea of disarmament so that many people are now quite insensitive to
the distinction. Arms control, which should be an ingredient in any wise security
policy, is all too frequently depicted as an alternative to such a policy. Far too many
of those who feel an urgent need to mitigate the undoubted dangers of armed force
and unbridled military confrontation feel obliged to attack the very idea of national
defence. Such attitudes breed intellectual confusion, half-truths and downright error.
To take a couple of related examples: it is continually asserted, or more often taken
for granted, that we are in the throes of an ‘arms race’, a process in which everincreasing sums of money are wasted on more and more, nastier and nastier weapons.
Such races, it is said, lead to wars, an idea probably given currency in this country by
no one more than Sir Edward Grey, the Liberal Foreign Secretary who led Britain into
the First World War and who somewhat self-defensively wrote afterwards that ‘the
enormous growth of armaments, in Europe, the sense of insecurity and fear caused by
this—it was these that made war inevitable.’ I would be more inclined to look for
causes at the decay of the Eastern European empires, but, be that as it may, there is
certainly plenty of evidence that arms races do not necessarily lead to war, and the
role frequently assigned to the democracies’ neglect of arms as a cause of the Second
World War suggests the complexity of the issue.
Nevertheless, the phenomenon to which Grey referred, timorous mutual perceptions
evoking counter-productive levels of armament, is the commonly cited driving
mechanism of an arms race. Some add an element of malice: the so-called ‘militaryindustrial complex’, the alleged conspiracy, of soldiers and armament manufacturers,
exaggerate the dangers and fears to promote its own political and economic interests.
Sometimes, indeed, the proponents of that theory suggest that the arms are not related
to any real external purposes and that the reasons for the continual build-up are purely
domestic.
A recent careful, statistical study of the subject, published in the journal of the very
anti-militaristic, Centre for Science and International Affairs at Harvard, concludes
somewhat sheepishly but with admirable intellectual honesty that ‘according to our
data…the presence of a nuclear arms race, far from constituting a given of
international politics, proves to be a chimera. We have,’ they say, ‘tried again and
again to test for the presence of arms competition or arms racing and we failed to find
anything each time.’
Now, before everyone decides to give up behavioural science and try common sense,
I should add that the authors do not mean, of course, that no one is buying arms; they
mean that they can discover no evidence that the rate of acquisition by one side
determines that of the other. Such behaviour could still be a problem; at the very least
it sounds like a way to waste money. But the metaphor of a race seems hardly apt and
Blind Man’s Buff might be more suitable. There is, however, a serious point, which is

5

that the remedies for the process suggested by one metaphor would be very different
from those implied by the other.
What behaviour would, in fact, be aptly compared to a race? It does not seem quite
the best way to dramatise the fact that the percentage of American Gross National
Product devoted to the military fell from 9.1 per cent in 1960 (that is before Vietnam
and before President Kennedy’s strengthening of nuclear forces) to 5.2 per cent in
1981, or that the military share of the Federal budget fell from 49 per cent to 23 per
cent. President Reagan’s much discussed rearmament programme will, if
implemented, put that 23 per cent up to 24 per cent in 1982. Admittedly, this
proportionate fall in share of the Federal budget is chiefly explained by the vast rise in
social expenditure. In other words, the military establishment has not shared in the
rising American standard of living. Thus, during the Seventies, American defence
expenditure fell in real terms by just under two per cent a year. The sum spent on the
most frequently discussed strategic nuclear arms was only two-thirds in the 1960s
what it had been in the 1950s, and only two-thirds in the 1970s what it had been in the
1960s.
In this country, British annual defence spending in real terms rose by between five per
cent and ten per cent in total between 1973 and 1981. As a proportion of Gross
National Product, British defence spending actually fell from over eight per cent in
the early Sixties to about five per cent today. It is true that, in the Soviet Union,
defence spending seems to have risen by over four per cent a year in the past decade
but even that is much less than they could have managed; a recent estimate suggests
that the Soviet Union could raise the annual increase to over seven per cent without
going on to a war-mobilisation footing. At present, Soviet expenditure is said—there
is some controversy—to absorb about 13 to 14 per cent of Gross National Product;
President Reagan’s programme would take the American proportion to about seven
per cent in 1986.
But let me be clear, I am not asserting that any particular level of defence expenditure
is appropriate. I am merely suggesting that the numbers I have been quoting are
scarcely what the metaphor of an accelerating headlong race would suggest.
A somewhat similar and related point could be made by taking up—as I will again
when I turn to arms control in a later lecture—the rarely contested notion that there is
a mad race for new military technology, that the new technology is usually worse, by
rarely defined criteria, and that it is the West and particularly the United States that
always leads these rounds of innovation. Thus, in a recent article in the New York
Review of Books, Mr George Kennan—the distinguished former American
Ambassador to Moscow, historian and one-time Reith Lecturer— writes that ‘it has
been we Americans, who, at almost every step of the road, have taken the lead in the
development of this sort of weaponry.’ This is at best a half- truth and the half that is
true is not patently disgraceful.
It is true that the United States and the West, being more technologically advanced
than the rest of the world, have pioneered in many areas and have used quality
whenever possible as an offset to the large quantities with which the Soviet Union has
equally sensibly compensated for its technological deficiencies. Not that the Soviet

6

Union values backwardness, as its investment over the last few years of nearly twice
as much as the United States in military research and development suggests.
But to return to my main point about military technology, we should not uncritically
accept that innovation is bad. In a recent letter kindly inviting me and a great many
others to an anti-nuclear conference in the Netherlands, the retired American Admiral
Gene La Rocque, one of a small but not endangered species of anti-military retired
officers, deplored the appearance of new nuclear weapons that he described as ‘more
precise and more devastating’. Students of the subject will see an element of internal
contradiction here; at least it all depends on what you don’t want to devastate. With
nuclear weapons the way to compensate for inaccuracy is simply to use a larger
warhead. Early nuclear missiles were very inaccurate; one, an early cruise missile
called the Snark, hit the wrong hemisphere on a test and disappeared up, the Amazon.
An increase in precision is thus a prerequisite for doing less devastation overall,
though the actual military target may be more certainly destroyed. Admiral La
Rocque is not for complete disarmament and one assumes that he would prefer
military men to have some idea of what it is they are going to hit. Indeed, you might
even prefer the enemy’s weapons to be accurate enough to avoid damaging what he
wants to spare, for we live in an age when, if war does come, it will be to the
advantage of all to restrict unintended effects.
At the very least, therefore, the answer to the question ‘Is more precision bad? ‘is not
obviously ‘Yes’. The point about technological innovation—to which I shall return—
can be briefly illustrated by another example. The submarine-based missile, the
Polaris-type I mentioned earlier, is generally regarded as a contribution to strategic
stability because of its immunity from detection; indeed, some who oppose the
proposed new American land-based MX missile as provocative want the alternative
put to sea. Yet the submarine missile was new once, and one suspects that, if invented
today, it would meet much opposition because its undetectability would be said to run
counter to the verification requirements of arms limitation. I recall the old lady who
refused to fly, believing that people should travel by train as the Lord had always
intended. More respectably, I also remember Clement Attlee’s despairing remark
before the war: that many of his party colleagues seemed to regard an ineffective
army as morally preferable to an efficient one.
Once again let me be clear, I am not claiming that new is necessarily better, or that
there is not a lot of money wasted by, people who think it is; I am merely saying that
new or even more is not invariably worse. That thought could be extended to suggest
that any idea of the complete abolition of weapons is a pipe-dream, and that if we
agree with Aneurin Bevan on the foolhardiness of going ‘naked into the conference
chamber’ we should feel even more exposed in that state on the battlefield. Given our
modern and admirable demand that our means shall demonstrably, serve our ends, the
ideas at the root of arms control are essential and should be nurtured. But this
demands their careful and realistic application to the problems of national security,
not their transformation into unreflective anti-militarism or gratuitous denigration of
ourselves and our allies. Such impulses, often based on generous and humane
instincts, are dangerous and the more so because of the unequal access popular
movements enjoy in the Eastern and Western blocs. One never knows whether
propagandists for disarmament in the West are naively oblivious to this disparity or
all too disingenuously aware of it.

7

The European Nuclear Disarmament Movement makes much of its appeal for support
on both sides of the Iron Curtain, but my own belief is that the effect of such
movements is inevitably discriminatory against the West, not merely because of the
totally different situations so far as debate and influence is concerned, but also
because it is the instinctive desire of Western liberals to hope that a natural harmony
of interests will break out given the slightest relaxation in tension, whereas
Communists make no bones about defining détente as a safer enhanced opportunity to
pursue conflict with the non-Communist world. There is thus a Western temptation to
give disarmament proposals the benefit of the doubt that is wholly lacking in many
other quarters.
I certainly do not believe we should have a policy solely of ‘confrontation’.
Appeasement earned a bad name in the Thirties and there are neutralists and
unilateralists whose preferences would lead to its misapplication once more. But,
properly considered, the concept of appeasement is a good one; by properly I mean a
due appreciation that others have security interests of their own which they are bound
to defend, and that they may do so at no small cost to us. Trying to find ways to
preserve our own interests without provoking counter-measures that increase our own
difficulties should therefore be a constant endeavour. Thus I believe arms control
should be both more and less than some uncritical exponents suggest: more, because it
should permeate all defence policy; less, because it can never be a substitute for
defence.
In my next three lectures, I will consider three important aspects of the current
strategic debate—so-called ‘strategic’ nuclear weapons, the balance in Europe, and
warfare in the Third World—before returning to the subject of arms control. I might
as well say now, however, that I fear there is no ‘non-strategic’ route to security in a
world of conflict.
I often exasperate people by expressing issues in terms of cartoons I remember. Many
of you must have seen some of the drawings of the most famous cartoonist of the
Great War: Bruce Bairnsfather. Bairnsfather’s cartoons, you may recall, usually
depicted a lugubrious veteran, Old Bill, and a raw and nervous recruit. In the most
famous cartoon of all, Bill and the recruit are cowering in a waterlogged shell-hole in
no man’s land under a fearsome barrage with shell bursts all round. The recruit
complains about their plight and Old Bill replies, ‘Well, if you knows of a better ‘ole,
go to it’ That, I fear, sums up my view of our strategic situation. It is a miserably
dangerous one. But, after some years of surveying the no man’s land of strategic
theory, I have yet to find a better hole than our present balance of power. Moreover,
the metaphor holds even when you contemplate the dangers of actually abandoning
one system and moving to another. I fear the best we can do is to tidy up the hole and
shore up its sides. That task alone is enough to bear further discussion.

8

