REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 6: Who's Moving the Goal Post?
TRANSMISSION: 16 December 1981 – Radio 4

Most of us alive today have spent by far the greater part of our adult life in the socalled nuclear age. This makes it all too easy for us to forget how little experience we
have of this radically new strategic world. Some time ago, an eminent scientist - once
one of the highest officials in the British defence establishment - was kindly trying to
make an inroad, however shallow, into my obvious incapacity to appreciate the
vastness of the universe. ‘Think of this,’ he urged me. ‘If the world were reduced to
the size of a football, the oceans would scarcely make it feel damp.’ We need a
metaphor like that, I feel, to make us realise how early we live in the nuclear age,
when measured on the scale of history. With such a reminder, we might observe a
decent humility about the diagnoses we make and the prescriptions that we offer.
The danger of over-confidence in one’s own analysis is aggravated by a surprising
familiarity in the superficial appearance of the contemporary strategic world. If we
look around, we see alliances, wars, threats of war, subversion and, let’s not fail to
notice, a good deal of what passes for peace. Over it all, however, looms the nuclear
weapon; at once our greatest danger and yet at the same time the main basis negative, narrow, but compelling - for hope of outdoing our predecessors in the
control of arms and limitations of war.
There are, of course, those who perceive a more benign foundation for peace. As I
recalled in an earlier lecture, the Western world has for several centuries cherished a
hope that the benefits of science, industry and commerce would wean men away from
war, which they would renounce on grounds of simple unprofitability.
Aspirations of this kind and the increasing destructiveness of modern industrial war
have promoted codes of international conduct that have evolved from the Concert of
Europe in the 19th century, through the Hague Conferences, by way of the League of
Nations, to the ultimate near- universal renunciation of aggressive war in the Charter
of the United Nations. For all the hypocrisy with which this pledge is undertaken,
cited and flouted, for all that it seems to be very much conflict as usual under the veil
of the Charter, I would not utterly dismiss the significance of so many nations paying
at least lip-service to peace and undertaking to renounce war. The need to justify
behaviour against this higher standard has a discernible if modest influence on policy.
The machinery that the United Nations provides for appealing to this standard and the
framework it provides for nations who want to preserve international peace and order,
have made a discernible difference to world politics.
There are even parts of the international community where a much more radical
transformation may have overtaken the classical state system. Some believe that the
so-called Western or Atlantic nations have come to constitute a ‘security community’

1

that is a group of states between whom war has become unthinkable and who
therefore no longer need to take security precautions against one another.
Once again, I don’t think that this evolution is entirely imaginary. I do believe that
Canada’s confidence that she will not be invaded by the United States, for instance, is
different, and justifiably so, from the faith that Finland can repose in its relationship
with the Soviet Union. The transformation of Franco-German relations from chronic
enmity to intimate mutual collaboration is deservedly one of the wonders of recent
diplomacy. And yet I fear we should view even these achievements as merely
provisional, and consequently moderate all the more our expectations of rapidly
extending harmony of this kind elsewhere. For I know few Frenchmen who don’t
believe that their national nuclear force is a source of confidence to them as they
contemplate the relentless resurgence of German power. I even know very senior
Canadian officials who assure me that they work on the hypothesis that, if they did
not freely offer military facilities to the United States, the Americans would seize
them if a crisis made that seem necessary. But, above all these particular doubts, we
must not overlook the fact that if harmony and cooperation have blossomed within the
West during the post-war years, they have done so in the classic conditions for such
behaviour—the perception of a common external enemy.
I don’t suggest that the community we have built is inevitably transient or that the
processes at work may not have deep and healthy roots:’ merely that even among our
Western selves it is premature to take the absence of security problems for granted.
Still less, then, can we assume that our limited success is a model the rest of the world
will follow.
That may be thought too gloomy a view of the world but I am sure it is the best light
we can throw on the East-West rivalry that dominates the contemporary strategic
scene. I doubt whether one can have a relationship of trust with a power like the
Soviet Union that combines a Bolshevik’s dialectical view of politics with a Russian’s
experience of alternate vulnerability and self-aggrandisement. The fact that we can
negotiate with the Soviet Union, reach mutually advantageous agreements on arms
control and even make occasional provisional settlements of political differences
doesn’t alter a fundamentally antagonistic relationship—a relationship, moreover, in
which military power; plays a fundamental part.
This is no mere Cold War judgment of my own. It is the consistently expressed view
of the Soviet Union itself, made freely available to anyone who is not content to
accept only the propaganda aimed at foreign audiences. Thus in a fairly recent work,
crisply entitled The Philosophical Heritage of V. I. Lenin and Problems of
Contemporary War, Lenin himself is cited approvingly for having laid it down that
‘no talks, no agreements, appeals or imprecations would stop the enemy if he was not
faced with a substantial military, force’. Following the same line, the editors
conclude: ‘The stronger we are, the stronger peace is’.
Nevertheless, the task of doing strategic business, with such a power and establishing
an equilibrium not of harmonious purposes but of countervailing power, is far from
hopeless. The Soviet Union certainly doesn’t want a major war. The work I quoted a
moment ago firmly declares that ‘the fact that imperialism would suffer defeat if it
forced a new world war on mankind, does not in any way, signify that we should

2

strive towards a military confrontation’. Soviet foreign policy is unquestionably
assertive, openly, dedicated to spreading Communism, and less openly to extending
Soviet power. At the same time, Soviet operational military doctrine is offensive, and
Soviet forces are designed accordingly. But neither of these characteristics means that
the Soviet Union is irrepressibly urged towards military aggression. The preferred role
of the Soviet armed forces is to exert political pressure and hold the ring while the
other overt and covert instruments of Soviet diplomacy help history do Soviet work.
Opportunities are seized but big risks are preferably avoided. Indeed, in an age of
deterrence, the Soviet belief that events must ripen in history and the strong Bolshevik
imperative to avoid being provoked into rash or precipitate action make the Soviet
Union perhaps the ideal opponent. The task of those who would oppose the Soviet
Union is therefore to outdo it in peaceful competition while maintaining the military
balance that activates the Soviet sense of caution.
Unfortunately, the alliance upon which the West relies to keep up its end of the
balance is in one of its periodic moods of uncertainty. Differences over how to
proceed and especially over what tone to observe towards the Soviet Union have been
endemic in the alliance, with Europeans typically showing nervousness whenever the
United States took a tough line, and fear of having their interests neglected whenever
the Superpowers get together. Familiarity should not make us complacent about the
present disarray, however, for some fundamental changes have undoubtedly occurred.
Faced with a wealthy Europe no longer inferior in anything but military power, the
United States is less inclined ‘to foot the bills, while the Europeans feel much less
deferential to American leadership. Moreover, having tasted the tangible fruits of
détente—trade, movement of people, a sense, if perhaps a false one, of safety—
Europeans want to feel that détente can continue; indeed, they hope that by giving the
Soviet Union vested interests in good relations, détente may be a source as well as a
consequence of security. More bluntly, many Europeans, and especially Germans,
want to appease the Soviet Union, because of its growing military strength, and would
like to feel that it’s safe to do so, because of Soviet economic weakness.
The Soviet Union obviously does put a value on trade and technological help and is
also well aware that such a line tends to reduce Western support for military
preparations. A flat refusal to try the approach would clearly divide the West, and
now that the Reagan Administration has resumed negotiations, the policy of détente
combined with defence is back in business. We should not forget, however, that
economic and political dealings create vested interests on both sides, while military
weakness is appearing only in the West. Moreover, in a crisis, the fear of aggression is
a far more compelling emotion than fear of disrupted trade. Defence is thus not so
much a necessary condition for détente, properly understood, but actually part of it.
A moment ago I reverted to my belief that the only long-term answer to the otherwise
natural preponderance of Soviet power in Europe is a greater degree of Western
European unity and self-reliance in defence matters. I have already also expressed my
relative pessimism about the prospects for this. For the past two decades most of the
talk about European defence collaboration and virtually all of the achievement have
concerned the joint production of equipment. The primary motive has of course been
to save money, while helping a European defence establishment and industry survive
American competition. Many hoped, however, that these practical projects, by
creating vested interests in joint ventures and providing experience of co-operation,

3

would breed a higher form of unity. If such common interests can be created, all well
and good. But, in fact, it seems that the practice of patching together different national
and commercial consortia for each project, combined with the care that states take to
prevent any derogation from national self-sufficiency, precisely because these are
defence industries, has made for negligible progress towards the wider unity.
Grasping admittedly at a straw or two, may it not be that the co-ordination of
European Community policy in the European security conferences, the contribution to
the Sinai peace force, the foray, however unsuccessful, into the Arab-Israeli dispute
under EEC auspices, the faltering steps of the European Parliament and particularly of
some of its party groups into security matters—may it not be that all these
innovations, which are largely compelled by the need to react to specific problems at
the political level, are the more likely way in which progress will come, if it ever
does? To adapt a formulation I used in a different context last week, it may be that it
is by trying to reach consensus on the ‘output’ of security policy, rather than the
material ‘inputs’, that a common will may emerge. If it did emerge, I suspect the
wherewithal to implement it could be cobbled together rather readily from the
national military establishments.
If there is to be any evolution of a more militarily effective Europe, then it would be
easy but wrong to underestimate the continued importance of the United Kingdom. So
far in these lectures I have avoided taking a parochial view from these islands, but it
would be perverse of me to say nothing of the British role.
The reduced material circumstances of this country, of which we have all become so
painfully conscious recently, tend to make us overlook the peculiar value of the
British contribution to the Alliance. For the importance of the United Kingdom is
inflated by the disabilities under which each of the other leading Western European
countries labours. Italy, surprisingly, staunch ally though she is, is both divided and
impoverished. France has resolved the psychological problems she inherited from her
defeat, by espousing an idiosyncratic egoism that incapacitates her as an ally and
which she is only recently showing signs of outgrowing. The Federal Republic of
Germany is exposed to Soviet military power by her position in the front line, and to
Soviet political pressure by her links with her fellow Germans in the lost territories.
She is further handicapped by the memories that both she and others still harbour of
the Nazi era and by the legal disabilities that she accepted or had imposed on her as a
consequence.
By contrast, the inhibitions on British defence policy have been almost exclusively
those of poor economic performance. Free of more specific hindrances, Britain has
been able to play the perhaps unexciting but immensely valuable role of ‘most reliable
ally’, dutifully trying to mend transatlantic differences and playing her part, however
reduced, in every dimension of Alliance affairs. For Britain to abandon this role
would deal the Alliance a great blow. I doubt if we can afford more than one France.
French independence, as President de Gaulle well knew, depends on the American
umbrella and the German shield. It is at best debatable whether either could survive
British defection. Even without its progressive economic weakness, Britain never had
the power to maintain the Western coalition single-handed; it may well be, however,
that she has the single-handed power to destroy it.

4

The BBC’s recent MORI opinion poll revealed, of course, that only nine per cent of
the British public do favour leaving NATO. Rather more, however, support policies—
against American bases, for example—that might well be incompatible with the
coalition’s survival. For myself, I would single out three policies that should not be
abandoned without the gravest reflection: the nuclear force, the contribution to the
Central Front, and a capacity, however modest, to undertake action outside the North
Atlantic Treaty area.
The nuclear force is by far the most controversial, but there is little to add to
arguments already exhaustively debated. For myself, I find persuasive the argument
that the existence of an ultimate centre of decision, independent of the United States,
capable of launching an attack on the Soviet Union if a nuclear war in Europe began
to get out of hand and to threaten British survival, is a powerful added deterrent to
Soviet aggression and to the use of the Soviet Union’s massive theatre nuclear forces
if aggression did occur. But to confer a useful role on the British nuclear force it’s not
necessary to envisage its use until the United Kingdom is already under nuclear
attack. At such a point, the vulnerability of Britain as a target becomes almost a
positive factor in enhancing the credibility of British retaliation. Given the
imponderables involved and the impossibility of the Soviet Union confidently
assessing the limits of British tolerance of damage’ or British determination to
retaliate, the only prudent Soviet course would be to leave a nuclear Britain unscathed
by nuclear attack.
Whether the nuclear capability should be provided by Trident I am not fully qualified
to judge and the problem would take us into more detail than I have time to develop.
It’s clear that if the rationale for a British force that I have just summarised has any
validity, the force itself must not, by its vulnerability and its basing, actually provide
an incentive for a nuclear attack on Britain. Trident passes that test well. It is, as usual
in Britain, the question of cost that raises the real doubt. We must recognise, however,
that for what they offer— assuming you accept the rationale In the first place—
nuclear weapons are relatively cheap, and if Trident is difl1cilt to fit into the defence
budget, it is largely because of the immensely costly nature of the conventional
forces.
If you believe in a national nuclear force —and, according to the MORI opinion poll,
a majority—52 per cent of the British public apparently do—it offers a much more
distinctive increment of power than any comparable investment In conventional
forces. Moreover, a British nuclear capability, however provided, keeps a nuclear
competence in European hands that are not systematically dedicated, like the French,
to refusing collaboration with the United States as a matter of principle. This might
prove of no small importance if Europe is ever to move toward autonomy without a
dangerous hiatus between the period of independence and the period of continued
reliance on the United States. Meanwhile, many European members of NATO—more
than sometimes find it judicious to air their views—have come to value the existence
of the British force both for its present deterrent effect and its future political
potential.
As I freely acknowledged in my lecture on European defence, and as the preceding
argument suggests, neither the British nor the American nuclear forces make sense
without an underlying framework of conventional capability.

5

By far the most demanding task here is the maintenance of a substantial presence on
the Central Front in Europe. The political, almost symbolic, reasons for this are not
much less important than the strictly strategic rationale. Of course, there are urgent air
and ground missions for British forces to perform and, if withdrawn, the gap they
would leave would be hard to fill. Indeed, it is likely that such a withdrawal would
materially shorten the fuse of nuclear escalation. But on strictly military grounds I
have long believed a more rational division of labour would free Britain to
concentrate on the maritime role which no other ally is so fitted to perform. But unless
a more coherent European defence community creates the necessary mutual
confidence to permit such a rational allocation of tasks, including a full French
participation, I fear the case for a strong British presence to reassure West Germany,
satisfy the United States, and display a deterrent unity to the Soviet Union is
inescapable. Moreover, though I believe in maritime power and accept that to have no
provision for a renewed Battle of the Atlantic in a prolonged European war would
entail a serious risk, such a war does seem increasingly less likely. The more probable
contingencies are either, a swift land and air battle leading to a quick Soviet victory,
or a repulse for the Soviet Union and a peace negotiated under fear of nuclear
escalation.
The recent defence review reduced British naval forces, but only to a moderate
degree. It may well be that a much more effective navy could rise from the remains of
the old. It is to be hoped that it does, for there are certainly limits beyond which the
sacrifice of maritime capability to the Central Front should not go. One such limit is
the preservation of a sufficient core of naval power and prestige for Britain to play its
appropriate maritime part in any more integrated European defence of the future.
Another is the continued capacity, modest though its needs must be, to take a hand in
military confrontations beyond the North Atlantic Treaty area.
Britain’s power to mount such operations —which are, of course, by no means
necessarily naval—can only be slight. But, as I argued in the lecture I devoted to the
affairs of the Third World, the role of Western forces there must often be subordinate
to broader political and economic- influences. When the Soviet Union is heavily
committed, only American power will suffice, but its application may well be
facilitated by the presence of some partner; however slim the partner’s material
contribution. In other cases, even symbolic forces may have a useful catalytic effect:
stiffening local resistance, as in Oman, or lubricating local political processes, as in
Zimbabwe. As those cases remind us, Britain has a fund of experience and
connections that is not yet wholly exhausted. Whether to draw on those funds,
whether to intervene at all, whether to support or dissent from the policies of the
United States or other British ally, are matters for judgment case by case; to have no
capacity to act, pre-empts any such judgment. The recent opinion poll suggests that a
majority of the British public would regret such a definitive contraction of British
capabilities.
It is indeed to the matter of public opinion that I wish to devote the last few minutes
of these lectures. The argument that is raging over strategy in the Western alliance is
serious in every sense of the word. Some unilateralists, I suspect, are less concerned
to advocate a solution to the world’s strategic problems than to ensure that their own
hands are clean. Similarly, I fancy that many alleged multilateralists are less

6

convinced of the virtues of any kind of disarmament than eager to scotch
unilateralism. But for all that, there are many responsible arguments that deserve a
careful hearing.
As I have delivered these lectures, I have naturally been all too well aware of how
forcibly many people disagree with some or all of the views that I have expressed.
Deeply convinced though I am of the errors of unilateralism, I have misgivings about
the way that it tends to be rebutted. It is not sufficient, indeed it is not very effective,
to respond with glossier brochures depicting the strength of Soviet forces. Necessary
though it is to explain that aspect of the problem, it is equally essential to rebut false
remedies and in some detail, and this not merely for effect but because we are, after
all, ultimately seeking solutions to the problems of war and peace that transcend the
immediate exigencies of the Cold War. If I have devoted some of the brief time
available to attacking some of the sacred cows of the less inhibited disarmers I have
done so not out of contempt but out of a glue appreciation of their influence and
importance.
As democrats we cannot regret free discussion and as rational beings we should not
reject the deeper understanding that can arise from the clash of even apparently
irreconcilable ideas. Realistically we must recognise, however, that if only ne side in
an international conflict permits such pluralism, it pays a price, and that price will be
higher, the more illusions the democratic public harbours.
To one persuaded like me of the need for vigorous defensive efforts, the most obvious
price exacted by a strong pacifist movement is the detraction from military
preparedness. But unjustified optimism about the strategic world can actually
encourage policies that the disarmers themselves should condemn. The crowning
example of this, I suppose, is, the tendency for parsimony in military spending to
drive strategy towards cheap and dangerous nuclear solutions in the way that vas
typified, above all, by the doctrine of Massive Retaliation.
There are also more specific and technical ways in which public unwillingness to
contemplate the needs of defence or admit the possibility of war can foster additional
dangers. The defensive capability of NATO forces on the Central Front could be
cheaply and easily, increased if the German government did not feel inhibited from
permitting the preparation of fortifications, for example, in peacetime. Our own
reluctance to take civil defence seriously is rather similar.
Public attitudes can also inhibit less tangible ways of increasing our readiness for
defence. For example, the military history of this century is replete with examples of
the frequent success of surprise attacks, a type of operation much favoured in Soviet
military doctrine and for which Soviet forces are increasingly well adapted. The
decisive surprises have not, however, usually taken the simple form that those who
have not studied the problem often suppose. As the Israeli disasters early in the Yom
Kippur War of 1973 illustrated very well, surprise usually consists not of the absence
of warning but of failing to heed warning when it comes, either because it is filtered
through overoptimistic preconceptions or because the appropriate precautions are
politically impossible. In NATO today, the sensitivity of public opinion to anything
that could be called provocative, the distaste for reminders that war might come, and
the unavoidable need to orchestrate all these elements across more than a dozen

7

sovereign publics, prevents a whole range of quite practicable improvements in
strategic responsiveness.
There is, however, yet another way; perhaps the most profound way of all, a way
deeply embedded in the liberal democratic personality, by which utopianism can
increase the danger of war. Conditioned by its ideals to feel guilty about the use of
force, democratic opinion is addicted to crusades: if not against some foreign foe, on
whom we project all the blame for our being in conflict, then against the idea of
armed force itself. Today, American public opinion, notoriously moody in this way, is
on the former tack, while more and more Europeans are taking the other. The danger
of such emotionalism leading to intemperate action has been amply demonstrated in
the past. We badly need a more balanced approach, for only thus can we hope for the
sustained and coherent policies an age of deterrence demands. Such an approach
begins from the vigorous scrutiny of both the problem and the remedies proposed.
In that vein, I have always been much impressed with the American theologian
Reinhold Niebuhr’s observation that a sound religion requires an ultimate optimism
that has entertained all the grounds for pessimism. If my lectures have traversed some
gloomy ground, it is with that justification in mind. That there is room for optimism, I
feel sure. I find it in the fact that our present debate, if fraught with danger, is at least
vigorous and open, that the bulk of British opinion still staunchly accepts the need for
self-defence, that Western leaders still resist defeatist voices, and that in the Soviet
Union animosity is tempered with realism. Above all, there is hope in the fact that,
however many specific hopes and projects for arms control agreements may be
falsified or frustrated, the idea of control, of communication between adversaries, and
of the heavy burden of self-justification that falls on anyone who takes up the sword,
has deeply permeated the political climate.
Where we most need Niebuhr’s leavening pessimism is to counter the illusion that we
can ever escape the burdens of defence altogether, and lay down this dangerous sword
for good. Justifiable in their context, such phrases and Dr Kissinger’s much publicised
‘Window of Vulnerability’ obscure the fact that security is a game in which the final
goal is never quite in reach. The illusion that it is, distorts our sense of practicable
possibilities. Security, like electricity, must be on hand when you need it. But also,
like electricity, it is almost impossible to store, and every generation must make its
own.

8

