REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 3: Shadow over Europe
TRANSMISSION: 25 November 1981 – Radio 4

Strategic nuclear balance is a terrifying thing to live with, but it at least has the merit
that its dangers are obvious and promote a great deal of salutary caution. It therefore
seems much more likely that, if nuclear war ever does break out between the major
powers, it will be as the result of miscalculation in some local confrontation rather
than a ‘bolt from the blue’, launched because the strategic balance suddenly looks
favourable to one side or the other. Doctrines for the limited and controlled use of
strategic nuclear weapons, of the kind I discussed last week, may do something to
enhance deterrent effects, but they must remain clumsy and dangerous instruments.
To make the nuclear deterrent that can be effective consequently requires a
framework of more traditional military capability of these weapons in such
confrontations more readily applied to specific strategic problems.
By far the most important potential arena for such conflicts is Europe, where the
interests of the Superpowers are most clearly defined and where the most powerful
military forces in history have been concentrated. If nuclear deterrence is the doctrinal
centrepiece of contemporary strategy, Europe is its geopolitical focus.
I must admit at the, start I would have discussed the European strategic scene with
rather more confidence a couple of years ago than I do today. Events in Poland, and
the rise of neutralist or unilateralist sentiment in Western Europe, remind us how the
political elements in a military balance can change much more rapidly than the
material.
The North Atlantic Alliance as it exists today is a response to the final collapse in
1945 of the self-contained European balance of power. After the First World War, it
took a decade or more before the next clear danger to European security manifested
itself; so much so that the RAF was reduced to measuring itself against a war with
France. In 1945, with Red Army west of Berlin, there was no room for such doubt
that if a danger did exist, it came from the Soviet Union. The North Atlantic Treaty
called in American power to redress the European balance. It explains a lot of
subsequent history to note that the treaty was signed in April 1949: that is, before the
Soviet Union had exploded an atomic bomb; and before the United States had decided
that the H-bomb was feasible.
There is remarkable unanimity among Western Sovietologists about what Soviet aims
in Europe have been consistently since 1945. First priority is the maintenance of
hegemony over Eastern Europe both for strategic reasons and because of its
ideological significance as an established part of the socialist camp. Second comes the
reduction of American power and presence in Western Europe and their replacement
by that of the Soviet Union itself. The expulsion of the United States is not to be

1

pursued, however, in such a manner as to create a self-reliant Western Europe,
especially not one under West German leadership.
This theme of breaking down the barrier created by the Western alliance runs through
all post-war Soviet diplomacy, whether in the area of arms control or of East-West
trade. Presented in the guise of ‘normalising’ relations, the theme finds ready echoes
in the West. To an extent this is understandable. A power the size of the Soviet Union,
which, unlike the United States, is a geographical part of Europe, cannot be denied a
role in European affairs. The Harmel Report, commissioned by NATO in 1967,
suggested that, the appropriate formula was détente and defence. This is a wise
suggestion but difficult to implement; rather, as Mr Dean Acheson once said to me,
like asking a man to breathe in and out at the same time. In theory, keeping up one’s
guard while exploring the room for compromise are compatible, even complementary,
exercises. Unfortunately, the two are hard to reconcile in democracies, as we have
seen in the disarray caused by efforts to implement sanctions after the repressive
Soviet action in Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan.
By nature, an alliance is a rational precaution against a threat: it can be destroyed
either by concluding that the threat is too small to worry about or by deciding that it is
too big to handle. In a nuclear Europe, both sentiments often combine to erode the
defensive will.
Against such a background the Polish crisis is dangerous for NATO as well as the
Warsaw Pact. To lose Poland would be a bitter ideological and strategic blow for the
Soviet Union. Hitherto, the Soviet Union has tried to ensure that no gain of socialism
is reversed; President Brezhnev raised this to an explicit principle in the doctrine that
bears his name. True, Yugoslavia got away, at least for the moment. Hungary,
Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan did not. Poland’s fate remains undecided.
It is not my place to explore the political possibilities any further but to look at the
strategic implications. If the Red Army crushes the Poles, NATO will be back in a
familiar situation. The Soviet Union may be less sure of its lines of communication
and, for a time at least, unable to rely on help from the Polish army. NATO may
become somewhat more lively in its military preparations. But previous episodes—
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Afghanistan—do not suggest that the stimulus would be
lasting.
But if the Poles do prevail, and establish their relative independence, it will at least
superficially be a considerable victory for the West; the first ‘roll-back’ of Soviet
power in Europe since the Austrian peace treaty and by far the most important. But
there will be much danger for the West as well.
Neutralists and unilateralists would be quick to point to it as evidence of the
reasonableness of the Soviet Union and the powerlessness of the Red Army. If this
opinion eroded European contributions to NATO, a reciprocal wave of
‘Mansfieldism’ in the United States—the belief that American troops in Europe
should be substantially reduced—might well loosen the American commitment. That
prospect I would find highly alarming, for it is far from certain that any Soviet retreat
would be permanent or that it would necessarily be so very fatal to Soviet military
capability. Already Polish unionists have understandably said, for instance, that

2

Poland must continue to guarantee the Soviet Union’s rights of military access and
transit.
So I conclude that the maintenance of the framework of Western European defence
would be just as necessary after a happy outcome for the Poles as after a less happy
one.
In view of his recent criticism of allegedly excessive Western fondness for military,
preparation and innovation, which I quoted in my first lecture, I found it interesting to
turn to Mr George Kennan’s own Reith Lectures, delivered more than 20 years ago as
an influential appeal for rapprochement in Central Europe. Some people suggested,
said Mr Kennan, that because the Soviet Union seemed unlikely to launch a gratuitous
attack on Western Europe, the ‘Western military structure could be dismantled’.
‘What utter nonsense!’ declared Mr Kennan. ‘As though we did not know that any
sudden and unilateral disarmament would create new political situations and new
invitations to aggression where none existed before. Armaments are important not just
for what could be done with them in time of war but for the psychological shadows
they cast in time of peace.’
Since 1945 the chief shadow in Europe - has been cast by the Red Army. The
orthodox Western view has been that NATO cannot cope with the Red Army in a fullscale conventronal war. For most of the postwar years the Red Army has fielded
much ‘arger quantities of divisions and weapons than NATO, but NATO has been
able to console itself with higher quality. There isn’t time for me to bore you with all
the much publicised evidence for believing that while the Soviet quantitative
advantage has, if anything, grown even greater during the Seventies, the West’s
qualitative edge has been seriously eroded and in some instances reversed. To take
tank forces as the most frequently cited index of strength, crucial to the success of a
modern invading force, the Warsaw Pact’s advantage over NATO on the Central
Front has risen from a superiority of 16,000 tanks to NATO’s 6,000 in 1972, to a
margin of 20,000 to NATO’s 7,000 today. At the same time the Soviet Union has
reversed the traditional pattern in which each new technical sophistication has usually
appeared first on the Western side. Thus the Soviet Union introduced the so- called
‘fourth generation’ tank—that is, the one after the Chieftain-Leopard generation—
befoi e NATO did. Indeed, the Soviet Union produced 2,500 of these new tanks in
1980 alone, and already has more of this generation deployed than NATO plans to
have by the mid-Eighties.
The impression of greatly increased Soviet military power is clearly ifitering down to
a wider public. In a MORI opinion poll, commissioned by the BBC on the occasion of
these lectures, no less than 54 per cent of the respondents believed, that the Soviet
Union was the ‘world’s strongest military power’, compared to 25 per cent who
believed that about the United States; similarly 55 per cent thought the Soviet Union
had more nuclear weapons than any other country, only 23 per cent thinking that to be
true of America.
Of course, even with its increased margin of superiority, the Soviet Union cannot yet
be certain of a quick and easy victory and must therefore still feel deterred from
aggression. How much comfort you derive from that, however, depends on how you
envisage the outbreak of war in Europe. Soviet military doctrine does lay great stress
on military ‘norms’: that is, on theoretically established levels of force necessary for
success in particular types of operation. This is, however, an ideal, and does not mean

3

they might not take a chance if political imperatives so dictated. Wars are often
started not out of confident ambition but out of despair about the prospects envisaged
otherwise.
Moreover, military balances are tricky things, partly in the eye of the beholder. Hitler
attacked France in 1940 and Russia in 1941 with forces materially inferior but
strategically better managed. The crude balance of men and machines takes effect
only through the mechanisms of military and political skill and determination. Here
again is the phenomenon I referred to in an earlier lecture: the instability of
conventional military balances, and the particular danger arising from the would-be
aggressor who believes he has hit on a ‘plan’.
The device NATO relies upon to replace this dangerous imprecision with deterrent
certainty is the nuclear weapon. For the last 15 years the official doctrirke for linking
nuclear weapons to European security has been the so-called ‘flexible response’
employing the ‘NATO triad’ of conventional, tactical nuclear and strategic nuclear
weapons. The first line of Allied resistance to conventional attack is to be
conventional resistance; if that fails, tactical nuclear weapons used on the battlefield
are both to reinforce the defence and raise the spectre of escalation; finally, if all else
fails, weapons are to be employed more widely and ultimately ‘strategically’ against
the Soviet Union.
This formula. reveals NATO’s basic dilemma: the fact that the most powerful nuclear
forces in the West belong to the United States, while the most likely battlefield
belongs to a collection of independent European allies. Clearly, the United States has
an interest in postponing the moment of strategic nuclear war, which is the only kind
that involves American territory, but any plans to prolong the nuclear or even
conventional phases of war in Europe may weaken Soviet fears of escalation and
would certainly devastate Europe if implemented.
The divergence of interests is real but it is, I think, a dangerous oversimplification to
characterise it, as some do, as a European preference for deterrence and an American
preference for defence. Everyone in NATO wants deterrence, because any war with
nuclear weapons about—indeed, any war at all between powerful alliances —would
be a dreadfully dangerous business. The argument is about how to do the deterring. In
the current debate over theatre nuclear weapons some unilateralists, ably supported by
several Soviet research institutes, suggest a positive AmenJ can eagerness for a
limited nuclear war confined to Europe. The obvious imponderables surrounding such
a war—the vulnerability of the immense American garrison and the countless
American families in Europe, the obvious danger of escalation to the intercontinental
level, however unintended—make it extremely difficult for me to understand why the
United States should run such risks, when the alternative of abandoning Europe to its
fate seems much more attractive. Moreover, if Europeans would naturally prefer
successful deterrence to war, most of them by no means want an assurance that, if
deterrence fails, the resulting war would immediately become nuclear and
unrestricted.
Admittedly, a few Americans as well as Europeans have advocated that a policy of
immediate recourse to nuclear weapons would be the most effective deterrent. Such

4

strategies can range from the old idea of a thin screen of forces as a tripwire to trigger
nuclear retaliation on Soviet territory,
—what is called ‘prompt deterrence’these days in the Netherlands—to the proposals
for using so-called ‘mini-nukes’ solely on the battlefield as an adjunct to conventional
defence. The truth is, however, that, to be credible, such policies would require
virtually automatic action, perhaps by predelegated authority to military commanders
to use nuclear weapons. Years of Alliance history have made it quite clear that no
government, European or American, is willing to commit itself finally to the use of
nuclear weapons until it can see the exact circumstances in which the need arises.
Consequently, NATO strategy contains an inevitable element of uncertainty. This
provides endless opportunity for uneasiness and mutual recrimination. Allied
statesmen have done their best to make a virtue of this ambiguity. The former British
Defence Minister, Duncan Sandys, once referred to ‘an area in between about which I
will not speculate and which I will not define’. Less elegantly but with equally
accomplished obfuscation, a recent Director of Nuclear Planning at NATO
explained:] ‘The NATO doctrine for the use of nuclear weapons is clear, concise,
simple and direct. It is that, when required, the Alliance would respond with nuclear
weapons on the scale appropriate to the circumstances.’
In practice, there are two different kinds of ambiguity in the strategy. The official one
is designed to keep the Soviet Union uncertain about when and how nuclear weapons
are to be used, but not ibout whether they would be used. Unofficially, many
Europeans are uncertain whether the United States would actually use nuclear
weapons on their behalf, but they hope the allegedly smaller risk of using weapons on
the battlefield would tempt the United States at least that far on to the slippery, slope
of escalation—and that that prospect will deter Soviet aggression in the first place.
The recent trend of the military balance has greatly increased the strain on this
creaking hinge in the Alliance. Soviet striking-power against the United States,
authenticated in the SALT treaties, discredits the idea of an American retaliation at
the strategic level, while the increased conventional power of the Red Army compels
NATO to rely as much as ever on the threat of escalation. NATO’s options are
therefore confined more than ever to that intermediate level of nuclear action on the
battlefield, where its advantage once lay. It has therefore been a natural and politically
devastating move for the Soviet Union to turn to building up its capabi1ity at
precisely this level of nuclear armament.
The great bogy of the Soviet effort is the notorious SS-20—a mobile missile with
multiple warheads and a range of some 5,000 kiometres. Over 250 of these have been
deployed since 1976 and a new one is now appearing every five days. As a result,
there has been a 56 per cent increase in the number of Soviet warheads of this
intermediate range over the last 12 months. It has been a great mistake, I believe, if an
understandable one, for NATO to seize on the SS-20 as a convenient excuse to justify
refurbishing NATO’s own battlefield and theatre nuclear weapons when, as we can
see, the problem is part of the overall decay of NATO’s relative capability at this and
other levels of warfare. The SS-20 is in fact only one part of a whole new family of
Soviet nuclear weapons in the European theatre, ranging from another missile of over
1,000 kilometres range, down through shorter-range . missiles to new nuclear-capable
aircraft and the introduction of Soviet nuclear artillery. These weapons ensure that

5

even if the so- called ‘Zero-option’ were negotiated at the level of the SS-20 and the
cruise missile and Pershing II, a great Soviet nuclear capability would remain and
with it Western Europe’s vulnerability.
With this much more effective, accurate, controllable array of weapons, the Soviet
Union may believe that NATO would not dare use its own battlefield weapons first,
because it would be outfought, and because NATO’s old plan of escalating to the
theatre level, perhaps involving Soviet territory, is now untenable because of the
much improved Soviet capability to fight at that level also, all without involving the
intercontinental weapon. It is thus not the SS-20 but the overall strategic context
within which the theatre nuclear balance has turned against NATO that constitutes the
genuinely new problem confronting the Western Alliance.
How can NATO best deal with this problem? I think we must recognise that there is
no wholly satisfactory answer. Once again we feel the other edge of the sword. Our
former strategies have not been perfect and nor will their successors be. If this is
uncomfortable for residents of Western Europe it is the price of living
-next door to an unpleasant Superpower.
So long as there is a nuclear Soviet Union, Western Europe needs a nuclear deterrent
to ensure the Soviet Union never comes to believe it could use or threaten to use its
nuclear weapons in Europe with impunity. This requires a retaliatory nuclear
capability able to threaten attacks on Soviet territory if the damage in Europe
ever reaches intolerable levels. At present there are three main sources of such
potential retaliation: first, there are the national British and French nuclear forces,
which reach their most plausible level of credibility on the assumption that British and
French territory is already under attack; secondly, there are the limited strategic
options of the United States, discussed in my lecture last week; and, thirdly there are
attacks launched on the Soviet Union or on Soviet forces in Eastern Europe by
American nuclear weapons based in Europe. It is, of course, to reinforce. the last
possibility that the current modernisation programme involving the cruise missiles
and Pershing II has been proposed.
The idea that the threat of such attacks is more plausible if mounted from European
territory is well embedded in the strategic literature. Primarily, it is argued that
credible threats of retaliation call for a certain symmetry and appropriateness— even,
if you like, legitimacy—and that this would be observed by retaliation from the actual
territory under attack. Using only theatre weapons would also, it is said, signify to the
enemy a desire to stop short of the ultimate stages of Superpower conflict and a
willingness to terminate the war if the immediate aggression in progress is halted.
Further deterrent effect may be
extracted from the symbolic presence of these American weapons on European soil
and the fact that they would be overrun in a successful Soviet invasion.
The Soviet Union, of course, denies that it would recognise any such distinctions and
asserts it would retaliate directly on the United States if Soviet territory were struck. I
have no doubt this is possible and that the Soviet Union does think it unfair that it can
be struck by medium-range American forces from Europe, while it can only hit the
United States with the long- range system covered by the SALT negotiations. But
before we are carried away with sympathy we should note the corollary of that belief,

6

which is that the Soviet Union should be able to rain weapons on Western Europe
with impunity.
Deterrence is a matter of painstakingly denying an enemy any option that offers him
promise of success without disproportionate costs. If NATO had no ability to hit the
Soviet Union in a war confined to Europe, it would leave just such a hole in its
defences. I conclude that the modernisation and strengthening of NATO’s capability
to fight at this level deserves support. The specific proposal to introduce cruise
missiles and Pershing II, however, seems to me neither so essential nor so dangerous
as the extreme advocates on either side of the current bitter controversy suggest. What
is important is for Europe to be seen to be working seriously and in harmony with the
United States on reinforcing this peculiarly sensitive link in transatlantic relations.
This link is needed, SS-20 or not, and it is the whole Western nuclear arsenal that
needs review and refurbishment, not merely the, few weapons embodied in the current
controversial package. American willingness to field systems in Europe that can
breach those limits that the Soviet Union suggests would mark the onset of
intercontinental war seems to me to be as far as the United States can go in registering
the unacceptability of a substantial nuclear war confined to Europe and, in so far as
they believe what they say about escalation, the Soviet leaders should be much
deterred.
But just as we should not be mesmerised by the SS-20 into ignoring the wider
significance of the theatre nuclear balance, we should not allow the nuclear questions
to blind us to the other elements in deterrence. It is the fact that the Soviet Union
cannot attack Western Europe without getting into war with the United States that ties
American nuclear power most firmly to European security. Moreover, while it is
Soviet nuclear power that compels NATO to maintain its own nuclear forces in
Europe, it is Soviet conventional superiority that compels NATO to consider using the
nuclear weapons first. The more credible NATO’s conventional capability, the more
plausible the rationale for the presence of the American troops and the more easily
postponed become those decisive questions about the nature and timing of nuclear
action. Indeed, if the Soviet Union is tempted to believe that NATO might never dare
use its nuclear weapons, the more urgent the need to reduce Soviet confidence in
victory in a wholly conventional war.
Reluctance to redouble efforts at conventional defence arises partly from failure to
recognise that, as in the nuclear field, well-considered preparations make the war
planned far less and not more likely, and partly from a belief that the task is hopeless
anyway. Yet, even while acknowledging that the recent increase in threats on the
flanks of NATO and beyond may put added stress on Allied forces, a proper
application of modern technology even within present budgets offers real prospects of
enhanced defensive effectiveness. Some new conventional weapons offer capabilities
not much less impressive than the battlefield nuclear weapons. New clusters of
individually guided anti-tank bomblets, for example, offer a single aircraft or missile
tank-killing power comparable to the dreaded neutron bomb and with much less
political fuss.
As I said last time, such technology needs to be adapted, with the minimum of
preconceived tactical ideas, to the exploitation of all the difficulties the Red Army
would face if it undertook the formidable task of overrunning Europe. At the end of

7

this lecture. T return to the deeper political implications of the current strategic
debate. The Soviet campaign against the NATO decision to modernise nuclear
weapons is a claim to a veto on Western Europe’s efforts to manage its own affairs.
Given a minimal Western capability for defence and a vestige of credibility in the
United States’ nuclear guarantee, the greater danger has always been not so much that
the Soviet Union would actually attack as that it would lean increasingly hard on
Western European politica! independence of decision. By reaching deeper into the
domestic European political debate about defence, the Soviet Union is groping its way
toward what has consistently been its goal since 1945: that is a decisive voice in the
determination of Western Europe’s political future and particularly the
reestablishment of the recognised status in all-German affairs it briefly enjoyed as an
occupying power. This would be a great prize, vindicating Peter the Great as well as
Lenin, for the advance would be both strategic and ideological.
To prevent the Soviet Union turning its threatened setback in Eastern Europe into a
success in the West requires a degree of self-confidence in Western Europe that I do
not believe could be sustained over time. in crisis as in calm, without a credible
balance of military power. Such a balance is also, I believe, the precondition for
further hopeful political evolution in Eastern Europe and a successful outcome to
efforts to negotiate measures of mutual reassurance, for, as I shall argue in a later
lecture, sound arms control must be based on sound strategic foundations.
I come finally to a thought which I fear has little political future at present but which
is nevertheless at the heart of the matter. Most of the problems I have been discussing
arise from that fault-line between European and American interests. Can Western
Europe, wealthy and populous as it is, avoid looking more to its own defence and the
mutual collaboration that it will require? The present moment seems hardly the time
to revive the idea of a European Defence Community. Interestingly though, in our
MORI opinion poll, 52 per cent supported a West European defence policy
independent of America and this was endorsed by no less than 46 per cent of the
under-25s. Even in these difficult days we see the small but remarkable initiative for a
European Community role in the Sinai peace-keeping force. The European Parliament
is edging, however gingerly, toward questions of security. Never did the United States
have more need of a powerful and self-reliant partner. If a fraction of the enthusiasm
and the ingenuity that is mustered in opposition to Western strategy were harnessed to
such possibilities, it would, I believe, do a great deal more to preserve the peace.

8

