REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 4: Conflicts of the Third World
TRANSMISSION: 2 December 1981 – Radio 4

Events in the Persian Gulf over the past few years have reminded us how Western
Europe’s expensive direct investment in its security could be seriously outflanked by
a successful blockade or embargo on oil supplies. Oil and the much more ancient
strategic significance of the Middle East as the meeting-place of three continents
make this area a keystone for global strategy. Two distinguishable processes are at
work there: one, the pursuit of the world’s dominating ideological and political power
struggle between the East-West camps, led by the United States and the Soviet Union;
and the other, the painful emergence of a pattern of security relations among the
newly fledged states of the area. In this respect, the Middle East is merely the most
significant microcosm of an evolution at work throughout the so-called Third World;
an evolution that will determine the strategic shape of the world for decades to come.
The European and strategic-nuclear balances I have discussed so far in these lectures
are expensive, dangerous and fluid, but, partly for these reasons, have so far been
stable in that there has been little war or little change in political alignment in the
Developed World. It is in the Third World that not only the indigenous nations but
also the powers of the developed world have shed most blood since 1945. This is not
surprising, for there is nothing to prevent it. The organised structure of deterrence and
confrontation that has stabilised the blocs around the Superpowers in the developed
world has no parallel in the Third World. Consequently, there has been free rein for
the many specific Third World conflicts that arise from frontier disputes, from the
nervousness of unstable regimes about the domestic rivals harboured by their
neighbours, from economic need or from unevenly distributed economic resources.
The scale of war in the Third World is not usually large and the most common forms
are brief, intermittent and sometimes covert. In the Middle East, however, and in the
Indo-Pakistani conflicts, a great deal of traditional land, sea and air warfare has
occurred, with great consumption of armaments. The burden of these armaments on
less developed countries is frequently deplored and understandably so. The overall
figures are misleading, however, for the truly astronomical expenditures, reaching 20
to 30 per cent of Gross National Product, are confined largely to the Middle East,
where the capacity to pay, either from oil revenue or American aid, is high. India
spends only some three per cent of its Gross National Product, or six or seven dollars
per head, and the typical poor country much less.
There is an understandable temptation in the Western democracies to steer clear of the
conflicts of the Third World, an area so voracious of assistance, especially at a time
when the sparks of distant — and not so distant — conflict could conceivably ignite
our own powder barrels. As we wash our hands, we would doubtless, each according
to our temperament, regard ourselves as leaving the Third World to stew in its own
juice or as respecting the inherent dignity and independence of newly created states.

1

While such abstention may be possible and wise in many particular cases, however it
is not practicable as a universal rule.
For one thing, as we have all been so forcibly reminded recently, the Western
industrial community and, in its own less intense manner, the Communist bloc, has
vital interests in the markets and raw materials of the Third World. Oil is, of course,
the most spectacular if transient example of this because of its critical economic role,
the lack of any short-term substitutes and the dominant role of the Gulf area in its
supply. A prolonged disruption of oil supplies that could result from malicious acts or
from mere chaos would produce a catastrophic fall in industrial output. The power to
create such interruptions therefore becomes a formidable political weapon and the
question of oil supply must consequently become a consideration if sometimes
unspoken in any future confrontations between the West and the Soviet Union, as well
as more obviously in crises in the Middle East itself. Oil apart, however, the
preservation of a world order open to trade on a commercial basis is a vital Western
interest. There is room for argument about the fair terms of such trade, but the Third
World nations are in no doubt about their need for access to the world’s most
advanced economies.
It is not, however, a matter of economics alone; most people in the developed courttries would feel oppressed and claustrophobic if the Third World abandoned its
admittedly defective but still pluralistic patterns of government and settled for
uniform totalitarianism and command instead of market economies. Our desire to
preserve what has been called a ‘compatible’ world, and the Communist powers’
equal eagerness to spread their own system, consequently injects the East-West
dimension into the relations with the Third World.
But there is, however, another feature of the strategic scene in the Third World which
compels universal attention without such a clear division in East-West interests. That
feature is the prospect of nuclear proliferation, which would introduce a terrifying
new element into the turbulence of the Third World.
When Britain became the third nuclear power in the Fifties, it was widely expected
that many others would rapidly follow suit. Each new nuclear acquisition has aroused
similar fears. In fact, the progress has been mercifully slow, France, China and India
followed Britain at intervals of eight, four and ten years, with Israel, at an unknown
date, being generally supposed to have, if not a bomb, then the capability to assemble
one in a matter of days. This more recent diffusion of nuclear power, if slow, has a
geographical significance, for it marks the shift of the wave of acquisition from the
developed to the less developed world. The developed world’s apparatus of blocs and
extended deterrence, so frequently deplored, obviously serves a useful purpose so far
as proliferation is concerned, for numerous countries among the best qualified
technologically to make nuclear weapons, like Switzerland or Canada, have not felt
the need to do so. Consequently, the most likely candidates on most lists of
prospective nuclear powers lie outside the major security alignments. Indeed, to prove
the point, some of the most worrying candidates are among the isolated so-called
pariah states, like South Africa, Taiwan, South Korea and, until recently, Iran.
It is generally assumed that the spread of nuclear weapons is a bad thing. In principle,
I agree, though the view is not universal. The French general, Pierre Gallois, the most

2

vociferous veteran proponent of the French nuclear force, is often taken as the
intellectual leader of those who believe that the proliferation of nuclear weapons will
also diffuse the ideas of deterrence and with them the relative stalemate that
characterises the balance in Europe. Most people, however, assume that life in a
nuclear crowd would be dangerous. By definition, many disputes which now have no
chance of ‘going nuclear’, could do so if one or more of the parties possessed nuclear
weapons. A country like Libya with a bomb is a terrifying thought. New nuclear
forces might also be technically unsound so far as safety and control are concerned.
Moreover, the very process of proliferation, in which nuclear forces might be
imminent but not yet operational, could lead to acute ‘pre-nuclear’ conflicts; a
theoretical possibility recently made reality by the Israeli air attack on the Iraqi
reactor.
There is also the sobering thought that if small nuclear forces were actually used with
results that proved not to be utterly catastrophic, the useful taboo on nuclear war that
has been observed since Nagasaki might be broken, with unpredictable consequences
for the climate of restraint elsewhere. Thus, beyond the obvious ecological dangers to
the whole world from nuclear explosions in the atmosphere, there are implications of
Third World proliferation for the balance between the longer established nuclear
powers. New nuclear forces must thus of necessity compel existing nuclear powers to
review their own requirements—anti-missile defence, for example, makes better sense
against small nuclear forces than large. Moreover, states with the capability to make
nuclear weapons but which have hitherto resisted might reconsider on grounds of both
prestige and security if new and perhaps otherwise humble members joined the
nuclear club. Some nations form especially significant junction points on the pattern
of proliferation and do so in more than one frame of reference: India’s- nuclear test,
for example, stimulated responses not merely in its neighbour, Pakistan, but also by
its demonstration of Asian achievement, in Taiwan and Korea.
There are thus general as well as particular dangers in nuclear proliferation. This does
not mean that there is a simple correlation between increased numbers of nuclear
powers and increased danger. It matters a great deal who gets nuclear weapons, when
and how. A nuclear force could be the stabilising factor in a military balance. I doubt
if all my listeners would deplore the news if they had it confirmed that Israel does
have a nuclear capability and that the Arabs believe it. Nevertheless, the general
dangers of proliferation are such that I think the burden of proof is on anyone who
wants to encourage a new power to join the nuclear ranks, and I believe therefore that
a non-proliferation policy is wise.
So how could such a policy be implemented? It used to be thought that the secret was
to stop nations gaining the technical ability to make nuclear weapons, especially by
denying them probably the most difficult stage, the manufacture and separation of the
fissile materials, plutonium 239 and uranium 235. Now, both the Non-Proliferation
Treaty—the NPT— and the IAEA—the International Atomic Energy Authority—are
meant to serve this purpose by combining pledges against making or transferring
nuclear weapons with the supervision of nuclear materials. Ironically, however, the
price exacted by the non-nuclear powers for accepting this restrictive system was the
promise that the nuclear powers and the International Atomic Energy Authority would
encourage and facilitate—almost sanctify, it seems at times—the spread of peaceful
nuclear technology. This has been so successful that literally dozens of nations will

3

soon have on their territory fissile material in various stages of refinement, most of it
in their own legal ownership, and which they are forbidden from adapting to military
uses only by bilateral agreements and by the Non-Proliferation Treaty itself, from
which they may legally withdraw at three months’ notice. My friend, Albert
Wohlstetter, the American strategist, the father of the phrase ‘the delicate balance of
terror’, likes to quote the unlikely authority of Florence Nightingale at this point,
when she commented that ‘Whatever else hospitals do, they shouldn’t spread disease’.
Now, I don’t think this means we could have a much better non-proliferation treaty,
for I believe that economic pressures will inexorably spread nuclear technology for
peaceful purposes. We can strengthen the technical barriers and we can make life
difficult for the less capable would-be nuclear powers, but denying the physical
capacity to make bombs seems to be a wasting asset in the non-proliferation effort.
Prohibition can serve as a warning system and warning can be made use of; but I
think that the way to make use of it and the key to the whole problem is to work
tirelessly and pragmatically on reinforcing each candidate’s disincentive to proceed.
The incentives and disincentives to acquire a military capability are many. Prestige
plays a role as an incentive and expense as a disincentive. But the most powerful
considerations naturally arise from the strategic balance itself. Thus if the Great
Powers of the developed world are to discourage nuclear proliferation in the Third
World, they will have to play a role in the security affairs of that world. This already
happens, of course. When both South Korea and Taiwan reacted to the Indian nuclear
test, and to the weakening of American prestige following Vietnam, by moving
towards nuclear reprocessing, the United States not only twisted their economic arms
to desist but strengthened its security assurances on the clear condition that the
nuclear efforts subsided. President Carter’s plan to withdraw the American garrison
from South Korea was shelved.
Guarantees, however, are frequently unacceptable to Third World countries, at least if
they are overt, for reasons of self- esteem and local political alignment. Sometimes,
the Great Powers can serve the same purpose by supplying the wherewithal for
aspiring nuclear powers to meet their security needs with conventional arms. Arms
supplies to Israel are commonly described as an inducement for Israel to keep its
bomb in the basement and recent military aid to Pakistan has obviously been related
to an effort—abortive perhaps—to persuade Pakistan not to follow India’s example
and test a nuclear device.
An ironic conclusion from all this is that the much denigrated arms trade may be
playing an essential role in curbing proliferation. Similarly, the pledge to reduce their
own nuclear armament put in the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a price for getting the
non-nuclear powers to accept such an inherently discriminatory contract may be
counterproductive; for only a powerful and self confident Superpower could, for
instance, serve as the guarantor to relieve Israel of the need to plan its own nuclear
deterrent against Soviet intervention or reassure Egypt and Israel against each other’s
nuclear potential.
The proliferation issue brings me back to where I started this lecture, to the fact that
armed conflict is endemic in the Third World and likely to remain so, and that the

4

Great Powers, certainly the two Superpowers, are inextricably entangled in this
system.
Looked at from a primarily military perspective, there has been a marked and peculiar
reversal in the behaviour of the two Superpowers and their allies .over the past decade
or so. In the Sixties, the European colonial powers were rounding off the wars of
imperial retreat in such campaigns as the British ‘confrontation’ with Indonesia, while
the United States, inspired by the theory of counter-insurgency, entered South-East
Asian wars under the banner of containing communism and ended up in the
Vietnamese disaster. Both Anglo-Saxon powers derived a serious dose of
disillusionment from these experiences and both withdrew with a remarkably similar
rhetoric of ‘never again’. In various mixtures, the rationale of retreat embraced the
conclusions that the interests at stake had not been so important after all, that they
could be pursued by politico-economic means with comforting sentiments such as
‘The Arabs can’t drink the oil’ and that if the Soviet Union tried to follow where
Western imperialists once trod, they would find the locals equally recalcitrant.
Moreover, if the West did want to intervene in Third World balances, it could do so
by backing up local clients from a safe distance.
Now the Soviet Union, for its part, has sought ever since its foundation to extend its
influence over the less developed as well as the developed world. This has been partly
an ideological imperative and partly, a result of the Soviet obsession —inherited from
Russia and compounded by Bolshevik revolutionary experience—with real and
imagined external threats. It has been ironically observed that the Soviet Union feels
encircled because the world is round and that they think it a fortunate feature of solid
geometry that after they control half the globe, each further addition to their territory
will necessarily reduce the length of their exposed frontier.
Until recently, however, the Soviet Union has lacked the capacity to project its own
military power directly beyond its immediate vicinity. Starting in the mid-Fifties with
the energetic arming of Nasser’s Egypt and Mr Khrushchev’s assertion that wars of
national liberation were certainly not to be included in his newly enunciated principle
that war was no longer a necessary instrument in the struggle against capitalism under
nuclear conditions, the Soviet Union has increasingly provided itself with means of
military action at a distance. The expansion of the Soviet Navy has been much
publicised; the development of a large strategic airlift and the maintenance of seven
airborne divisions much less so.
Of course, all of these forces have roles in a potential European or Chinese war. But
as the rhetoric of retreat has sounded around Western Third World strategy in the last
decade that of advance has emerged louder and louder in the Soviet Union. Rendered
more confident by nuclear parity, which confers what one might call a degree of
‘undeterrence’, Soviet leaders have frankly declared that the improved correlation of
forces frees them to act more boldly overseas. Thus last year, to give an example, Mr
Mikhail Suslov, the Kremlin’s senior ideologue, observed that ‘the change in the
correlation of forces in favour of Socialism has created favourable conditions for the
growth of the people’s liberation struggle. Major victories,’ he said, ‘have been won
in recent years by the forces of national liberation and social progress in the countries
of Asia, Africa and Latin-America.’

5

As Marshal Grechko, the former Soviet Minister of Defence, had made clear in an
earlier speech, the Soviet role includes direct military action: ‘At the present stage,’
he stated, ‘the historic function of the Soviet armed forces is not restricted merely to
their function in defending our motherland and other socialist countries. In its foreign
policy activity, the Soviet state actively, purposefully, opposes the export of counterrevolution and the policy of oppression, supports the national liberation struggle, and
resolutely resists imperialist aggression in whatever distant region of our planet it may
appear.’
Put into practice, we have seen a clear shift from the covert and oblique to the direct
and open style of Soviet military action in the Third World, limited though it still is.
Soviet pilots flew air-cover over Cairo in 1970, a notable innovation; the brilliant use
of Cuban forces in Angola and Ethiopia kept the Soviet military role down somewhat,
but the Afghan affair has marked a clear increase in scale.
Afghanistan may need cautious interpretation as an indication of Soviet intentions
because it is both in the Third World and contiguous to the Soviet border.
Nevertheless, it does not seem unduly alarmist to conclude, that where practicable,
Soviet forces may henceforth be used directly to prevent the reversal of the successes
of Soviet-inspired regimes in the Third World as they have repeatedly .been in
Eastern Europe. Until Afghanistan, at least, these interventions have been genuinely
welcomed by the Soviet protégés as in Ethiopia and Angola; for if the Soviet Union
has little to offer these days by way of economic and social example, it is undoubtedly
expert in the widely demanded art of seizing and holding power. Nor, the Soviet
Union has made perfectly plain, does ‘detente’ or an understanding at the level of
nuclear arms control, imply any lessening of such overseas activism; indeed, it seems
probable the Soviet Union sees such understandings as registering its achievement of
status as a truly world power, and regards the hostile Western reaction as an
unjustified attempt to put back the clock.
Even before the Iranian revolution and the Afghan invasion had aroused acute anxiety
about the Persian Gulf, the Soviet and Cuban forays into Africa had stimulated second
thoughts in the West about the wisdom of foreswearing a military role in the Third
World. With the so-called Carter doctrine of resisting aggression in the Middle East,
the Rapid Deployment Force, the forward basing of AWACS aircraft and the familiar
search for bases and facilities, the United States is reversing its retreat and calling its
allies to join it in the troubled waters. But for a variety of reasons, some more
honourable than others, the response has been less than overwhelming.
It would be presumptuous and foolhardy for me to prescribe solutions. It may not be
so reckless to utter a few cautions and to suggest some things that should not be done.
Someone has very well said—I only wish I could remember who, but I think it was in
French—that we imagine the past and remember the future. We should certainly not
imagine that we can re-create some golden age of Western control over Third World
affairs. Soviet capability for ‘power projection’, as it is called, will not disappear. Nor
can the Third World countries be treated as the mere objects of policy now they have
tasted autonomy, acquired a great deal of military power and demonstrated to
communist and capitalist alike the costs of taking on an Afro-Asian guerrilla war.

6

This suggests to me that the underlying idea of the post-Vietnam American strategy
—of operating as much as possible through the local structures of power—was sound,
if inadequate by itself. Here and there, signs of regional stabilisation are appearing in
the Third World, through the emergence of a pre-eminent regional power, like Nigeria
or Brazil—or, critics may say, like Iran. There are also embryonic regional
organisations such as the Organisation for African Unity or the Association of South
East Asian Nations which embody a useful idea of mutual restraint. If the West is to
be true to its professed ideal of national independence it will encourage such
developments.
The cheapest way to do so, in both political and economic terms, is by diplomatic and
economic action, rather than military. But when Cuban, Libyan and even Soviet
forces can be called in to affect the issues, elements friendly to the West clearly need
confidence in some countervailing power.
Despite the dramatic growth of Soviet capability for projecting military power, an
alliance led by the United States is well equipped to compete. American logistic
facilities still exceed those of the Soviet Union for most areas of the globe, and recent
measures will enhance them. But logistic capability measured in conventional terms is
not wholly relevant in a competition where he who is first on the spot is rarely
challenged by the other Superpower. The preferred Soviet use of armed force has
been to protect the gains of prior political and subversive action. Quick decision and
rapid action is therefore at least as valuable as crude fighting-power. This is a field
where much modern technology can ease the difficulties of the decision-maker,
providing the very idea of intervention is not anathema to domestic public opinion. In
this respect it may be interesting to note that it is failure rather than effort that seems
to have caused the sharpest opposition in Western societies.
The one area where the West does not enjoy logistical advantages is the Persian Gulf,
with its vast stakes of oil and geopolitics. Geopolitics may, indeed, be more important
in the long run in the game of mutual encirclement which the Soviet- ChineseAmerican contest involves. Here the myriad of security problems typical of the Third
World is compounded by the real possibility of a massive invasion by the Soviet
Union. Obviously the ultimate military deterrent to this can only be provided by the
United States. Many of the strategic considerations will be well known to you from
the extensive public debate. But perhaps I can illustrate the American logistic problem
merely by pointing out that Tehran is as close to Dublin as it is to the new AngloAmerican base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean.
Nevertheless, the task is far from hopeless. The more imminent dangers arise from
local unrest, and this is as amenable to limited measures of economic and military
assistance as in any other region. While Soviet capability for an all-out East- West
war in the region is vastly superior, its task would by no means be easy. More to the
point, it is highly unlikely that the Soviet Union wants an all-out war in the region and
the task therefore becomes one of creating a sufficiently plausible Western presence
to make such a prospect likely.
This task returns me, finally, to the American request that Western Europe and Japan
reconsider their military abstention from Third World affairs. America’s allies are
understandably nervous. They fear the costs of a military role: costs that would be

7

both economic, military and, if the Soviet Union took reprisals, at best expensive in
terms of the so-called dividends of détente in Europe and, at worst, raising the danger
of a conflict spreading to Europe itself. Many Europeans also doubt the
appropriateness of American prescriptions for the Third World and cling to the hope
and belief that military intervention is neither necessary nor efficacious. Nevertheless,
Europe is inevitably involved, not merely because the stakes, particularly oil, affect it
but because, in a European nightmare that has been recurrent ever since the Korean
War, the forces that the United States needs elsewhere may be bled from its European
garrison. And never will the Europeans miss those forces more than if some Third
World crisis both draws them away and raises the tension simultaneously in Europe
itself
But anyone who meets this problem with a plea for a return to the good old days of
inter-Allied solidarity is again imagining the past. Conflict east of Suez has
traditionally brought out the worst in the alliance, with Americans denouncing
European colonialism and the Europeans condemning American militarism.
Remember the Suez crisis itself.
If we are to master the problem today and in the future, then I think both sides will
have to yield a little. So long as the Europeans—and the Japanese—acknowledge that
the problem exists, the choice lies between the added effect created by united Allied
action, sharing the risks and the political costs, and the benefits of allies acting
separately, each exploiting its own special contacts and relationships. The fact that
much of the most effective action called for is political and economic or, if military, at
a low level, all of this makes a case for continued independence of action. Certainly
the United States needs the powerful European and Japanese economies mobilised to
sustain friendly regimes in the Third World. But when it comes to military action, the
new-found reach of Soviet forces can only be convincingly offset by the United
States. Underneath such an umbrella, however, it may be that the small but
experienced forces of Britain and France can continue to do useful work. Somewhat
surprisingly, in the BBC MORI opinion poll that I cited last week, no less than 55 per
cent of the respondents were willing to see Britain play a military role in the Middle
East again, if British interests were threatened, while only 29 per cent were opposed.
Those in favour included almost half of the under-25-year-olds and 48 per cent of
Labour voters. In the longer run, Western Europe and Japan will have to consider
whether it is possible to exercise worldwide economic and political power on a grand
scale without any matching military capability. This is a question to which I do not
expect a quick answer, because, however the contemporary East West contests works
out, it may be generations before the process of adding dozens of new nations to the
world power balance has run its course.

8

