REITH LECTURES 1981: The Two Edged Sword
Laurence Martin
Lecture 5: Not For the Sake of Their Blue Eyes
TRANSMISSION: 9 December 1981 – Radio 4

As I turn now to look at arms control and disarmament only in this, my fifth lecture,
you may think I have left the horse well behind the cart. Many people today clearly
believe that a discussion of armed force should consist chiefly of vehemently
advocating disarmament. It’s easy and popular to do this, especially if you pass lightly
over the difficulties. But as arms control is intended to avert some of the dangers
presented by our strategic environment, it seemed reasonable to examine this before
evaluating the cures prescribed. In a climate where everybody seems to be pushing
some cheap or easy remedy a note of caution may not come amiss. Uncritical
enthusiasm may actually obscure the very real if limited benefits the idea of arms
control may yield. For in a nuclear age some element of control we must certainly
have.
Arms control is a vast subject, irresistible to thesis writer and pamphleteer alike. Even
the bibliographies cover whole shelves. The terms ‘disarmament’ and ‘arms control’
are commonly used interchangeably, but, as I pointed out in my first lecture, there are
really two fundamentally different theories. Indeed, when the United States Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency was founded in 1961 there was a major
congressional battle over which order the terms should take in the agency’s title. The
simpler idea, though the more radical and elusive aim, is that of disarmament, by
which is usually meant reduction in the quantity and perhaps even the total abolition
of armaments.
This approach has most plausibility if you believe that armaments are the primary and
perhaps even the sole source of international conflict. Then the process of reducing
arms would become self-reinforcing and the vicious circle that’s widely supposed to
exist in the form of an arms race would be reversed in the virtuous direction of
growing mutual confidence. It’s not true, I think, that, as is sometimes argued, atms
are merely a symptom and never a cause of conflict so that wherever disarmament is
possible it is not really needed. For military issues can be a source of tension. But
without my delivering a course of lectures on the theory of international politics, I
imagine that most of us could intuitively agree that arms are not the sole cause of
conflict. Even a crude historical survey suggests that political events do much more to
determine the rate of arms procurement than the interaction of military preparations
themselves. Thus it took the invasion of South Korea in 1950 to promote a wave of
American rearmament when the Soviet acquisition of a nuclear bomb the year before
had failed to do so; it was Mr Khruschev’s reopening of the Berlin issue that inspired
the surge of rearmament under President Kennedy, the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia in 1968 that delayed the start of SALT and thereby probably allowed
the development of multiple warheads to get beyond recall, and, more recently, it was
events in the Horn of Africa and in Afghanistan that stimulated the American military
revival begun by President Carter and continued by President Reagan. On the Soviet

1

side, the great military build-up that still continues was inspired by humiliation in the
Cuban missile crisis and by the break with China, rather than by the deployment of
American nuclear weapons in the Fifties.
So if disarmament itself cannot be relied upon to eliminate conflict and as, in any
case, armed force cannot be made to disappear in an instance, a framework of security
must be maintained at least during the process of disarmament itself. In the absence of
a world government to enforce order, to adjudicate disputes and to enact peaceful
change, this security framework would have to take the continued form of a balance
of power. Thus the famous McCIoy-Zorin agreement of 1961 laid down general
principles for disarmament, which are still supposed to govern negotiations between
the Soviet Union and the United States. This agreement declares that all measures
‘should be balanced so that at no stage. . . could any state or group of states gain
military advantage and that security is ensured equally for all’.
These are extremely demanding criteria, even assuming a high degree of goodwill.
The modern strategic scene is very complex, a bewildering array of armament, the
significance of which can be judged only within an even more complicated
geopolitical context. Even if a theoretically equitable and stable balance could be
struck, there would remain the task of seeing that it was established and observed.
Faced with a particularly sweeping Russian disarmament proposal, a senior Western
statesman once remarked on ‘the difficulty of obtaining any true information from
Russia and thus on the uncertainty of any reciprocity of confidence’. The problem of
‘verification’, on which Metternich had thus put his finger, remains one of the more
intractable that has only partially been eased by modern technology.
As I mentioned briefly in my first lecture, the difficulty of phasing partial
disarmament gave rise in the 1950s to suggestion that a dash should be made for
General and Complete Disarmament within a very few years. This, it was thought,
would eliminate the problem of balance and reduce that of verification, for it was said
to be easy to tell the difference between ‘some’ and ‘none’.
The reasons why this solution is quite impracticable throw an instructive light on less
radical proposals. Complete disarmament is incompatible with the maintenance of
domestic order. Even the Covenant of the League of Nations in the interwar years
looked only for reductions of arms to a level ‘compatible with national safety’; yet the
forces needed to maintain law and order in a country like India would have no small
military capability against India’s smaller neighbours. Moreover, far from relaxing,
the standards of verification would actually tighten, because total disarmament would
magnify the significance of any weapons that were concealed, especially if they were
nuclear. Indeed, many civilian devices, such as aircraft or a pesticide factory that
could turn to chemical warfare, would become serious potential instruments of
coercion. Starting from such a basis or in more orthodox ways, rearmament would
always be possible, and the resulting instabilities might be greater than those of a fully
armed world. The American Civil War, one of the most destructive and the most
technologically advanced of its day, began between belligerents virtually disarmed, by
contemporary European standards. In a disarmed world, therefore, it would be only
prudent to prepare for possible breakdown of the system, yet such preparations would
obviously inhibit the development of mutual confidence.

2

At the end of the Fifties, the new concept of ‘arms control’ emerged in reaction to the
sterile hypocrisy of the propaganda battle between grandiose schemes for general
disarmament. Arms control shares many of the aims of disarmament, but the
underlying assumption and the means envisaged are very different. Arms control is
commonly said to seek a reduction in the incidence of war, the mitigation of its effects
if it occurs, and to do so if possible at reduced economic cost. But arms control does
not assume the resolution of all international conflicts or the complete elimination of
arms. It seeks to steer the military system into safer, cheaper channels, not to abolish
it, accepting that states will continue to give priority to their own security and to base
it on efforts at their own self-defence within a balance of power.
To some extent, then, the aims of arms control are the goals of any rational security
policy; even states that go to war are always glad to minimise their costs. The insight
of arms control is that those costs, whether in war or in armed peace, arise from the
actions of the enemy; that he wants to limit his costs, and that he may therefore
moderate his behaviour if you do likewise. There may indeed be a common interest in
moderation even between adversaries. Arms control is thus a perspective from which
opportunities for mutual restraint can be discerned. Arms control agreements, tacit or
explicit, are intended to provide reassurance that moderation will be exercised and to
make plain what the elements in the bargain are. It’s important to notice, however,
that the incentive to moderate behaviour and the guarantee that this will be
forthcoming arise from the balance of power and not from the agreements. Thus arms
control is a manifestation of deterrence and, like deterrence, actually depends for its
success on the very armed force that it is trying to control. It is therefore essential that
the policies adopted in the name of arms control do not upset the underlying
equilibrium.
Arms control is commonly thought of as a process of negotiating agreed limitations
between states. But arms control can be pursued unilaterally. Raising the idea of arms
control to prominence in strategic thought has provided a constant reminder of the
two-edged nature of armed force and established the importance of not needlessly
provoking dangerous reactions in the behaviour of others. Armed forces and weapons
can be designed and deployed so as to curb unauthorised, unintended or
indiscriminate effects. Weapons can be made as invulnerable as possible so as to
minimise the enemy temptation to attack them and consequently reduce one’s own
impulse to precipitate use. The record of recent years suggests that far more has been
achieved in such ways, especially where the strategic nuclear weapons are concerned,
than by negotiated arms control agreements. There is indeed a danger that simplistic
notions of arms control with a bias against anything that cannot be caught in formal,
verifiable international agreement may hinder potential contributions to arms control
by unilateral measures. Thus, it could be argued, for example, that a simple mobile
intercontinental ballistic missile, though perhaps incompatible with the verification
requirements of SALT, would have solved the American vulnerability problem more
securely and much more cheaply than the enormously complicated MX missile
system.
Of course, the arms control perspective doesn’t always receive due weight in military
planning. Military planners are no more immune than disarmament enthusiasts to
tunnel vision, giving their immediate project undue prominence in the wider picture.
It was therefore a natural move in bureaucratic politics as well as a public relations

3

gesture for some governments to establish separate arms control agencies to ensure
that this aspect received due attention. Typically, this was carried to the nth degree in
the United States, where every new weapon development proposal requires a parallel
arms control impact’ statement. Yet, in principle, this is a retrograde step, tending to
identify arms control as an alien force from outside the military establishment.
Properly considered, arms control is not an alternative to defence policy but a
criterion by which the latter is to be judged.
Nevertheless, it is on negotiated agreements that most advocates of arms control seem
to pin their hopes. The search for such agreements is necessarily an arduous task, for
by definition it is pursued between adversaries or potential adversaries. The mere
existence of arms control negotiations or even agreements can certainly not be taken
to indicate an underlying harmony of interests, although there are many who would
like to think otherwise.
The Soviet Union wages an unceasing propaganda campaign, employing a stream of
arms control proposals and intensive exploitation of well-meaning disarmament
lobbies in the West. But, in the more esoteric utterances of their political and military
journals, the Soviet authorities are refreshingly frank about the true nature of the arms
control business.
For them, arms control, like peaceful co-existence, is a modified form of struggle not
a road to reconciliation. Certainly, the Soviet leaders accept the need to avoid nuclear
war if possible, and they value the contribution made to crisis management by arms
control. They also use arms control negotiations to inhibit Western military
programmes. They give no sign of sharing the view, prevalent in many Western
quarters, that their own military activities might be dangerous.
The Soviet Union is frequently accused of having used the years since the conclusion
of the first SALT Treaty in 1972, years of relative lull in American nuclear
procurement, to acquire the largest increment of military, and especially nuclear
power, since the Cold War began. This is in no way incompatible with Soviet notions
of arms control, however, for arms control agreements are seen as concessions wrung
out of the West by the growth of Soviet power. It is not, as the Russians say, for the
sake of their blue eyes that we make agreements with them, but because they leave us
no choice. In the words of a leading Soviet writer on arms control, O.V. Bogdanov,
‘Life has already shown that imperialism proceeds to measures of disarmament only
under the pressure of direct necessity.’ Increased Soviet military power, far from
endangering arms control, is actually a precondition for it.
I don’t deny for a minute that Western arms control negotiators also try to strike
bargains favourable to themselves, but I am sure they don’t approach their work so
consistently as a form of struggle. Still less do I believe that Western public opinion
appreciates the gladiatorial nature of the arms control business.
In such an atmosphere, arms control negotiations are often intended to achieve results
quite different from their ostensible purpose. A negotiating proposal may be seriously
intended as a basis for agreement, a gambit on the way to such an agreement or a
purely specious move in quite another game.

4

To take an example given topical relevance since I prepared this lecture by the
grounding of the Whiskey class submarine in Swedish waters, the Soviet proposal for
a Nordic nuclear-free zone would do little to preserve the Scandinavians from nflclear destruction if either Superpower wanted to destroy them, but the mere proposal,
let alone an agreement, is well calculated to widen the divide between the always
slightly tentative Nordic members of NATO and their allies. In exactly the same spirit
the Norwegians have cleverly turned the shaft by offering to discuss it, provided the
area for denuclearisation includes the Kola Peninsula, which, with Murmansk,
includes perhaps the densest single area of Soviet nuclear bases.
A more complex and important example is afforded by the ill-fated Mutual Balanced
Force Reduction negotiations in Europe that began in January 1973. To many, I am
sure, it seems incomprehensible that such a good idea as reducing the level of
armaments in Central Europe should have got nowhere in eight years of arduous
talking. In reality, the whole affair is a strategists’ and arms controllers’ nightmare
that becomes much less mysterious if you reflect on the participants’ true motives.
NATO entered the talks partly because Soviet pressure for a conference on security in
Europe—the ultimate Helsinki Conference—threatened to become a propaganda
success for the Russians, with no real bearing on security. NATO therefore demanded
parallel military talks, and the Soviet Union agreed, in order to get the Western
powers to Helsinki. NATO was also impelled by the efforts of Senator Mansfield to
secure substantial withdrawals of American troops from Europe because of West
Europe’s refusal to shoulder more of the defence burden. Opening negotiations with
the Soviet Union enabled the United States government to claim that implementing
Senator Mansfield’s proposals would throw away American bargaining power. For its
part, the Soviet Union cast its proposals- in terms of national, not alliance-wide,
ceilings on remaining forces. This implied a specific ceiling on the West German
army and thus served the constant Soviet purpose of isolating the Federal Republic—
just the danger that in more recent days has made Chancellor Schmidt refuse to take
the new theatre nuclear weapons unless at least one Continental ally does so too.
Leaving tangential political purposes on one side and concentrating solely on the arms
control agenda of the force reduction talks, we can see the difficulty of trying to adjust
or establish a balance of power, rather than merely registering one. As I reminded you
in my third lecture, so far as anyone can calculate, the Red Army enjoys superiority in
Central Europe and the Soviet Union uses this regularly as a way f bringing political
pressure to bear. The erosion of NATO’s erstwhile superiority in tactical nuclear
weapons having trumped one of the West’s few bargaining cards it becomes difficult
to see why the Soviet Union should grant NATO the security and equality that it will
not purchase by its own efforts.
Even if the basis for a deal existed, however, these negotiations also illustrate the
technical complexity of the problem. The SALT agreements, widely regarded as a
masterpiece of diplomacy, only entailed calculating the balance of a few, highly
comparable missiles. Striking a balance on the Central Front involves a myriad of
land and air weapons all varying in significance according to terrain, weather, the skill
of the commanders, the degree of alertness and the responsiveness of political leaders
to strategic warning. From recent history—the German breakthrough in 1940, Israel’s
campaigns, the American defeat in Vietnam—we know that the number and even the

5

quality of men and weapons are far from decisive when what the Russians call
operational factors are added in.
Nothing has done more than the SALT treaties, I suppose, to spread the impression
that we have entered a brave new world of negotiated disarmament. Yet those, too, I
fear, illustrate the intractability of armed force to control by formal agreement. In the
first place, the actual achievement is limited, encouraging the jibe that these are
agreements not to do what nobody wanted to do in the first place. A keen disarmer
notes that, except for a marginal reduction in nuclear delivery vehicles required of the
Russians by the unratified second SALT treaty, no actual disarmament is involved at
all, unless you count the abstention from anti-ballistic missile defences. Indeed, the
price paid to secure consent to the agreements within each Superpower has probably
stimulated strategic procurement. Effort has poured into whatever areas of technology
remained unrestricted. The decade since the first SALT treaty has seen the biggest
ever expansion and diversification of Soviet strategic forces; certainly the potential
for mutual annihilation still exists.
The SALT agreements provide a good illustration of how the diplomatic need for
simple concepts, such as parity in one or two dimensions, does violence to the
intricacy of the actual strategic problem. The treaties were made possible by the
development of the satellite-born and other methods of reconnaissance—the so-called
‘national technical means’ in the terms of the ‘on site’ treaties that dispensed with the
intrusive methods of inspection to which the Soviet Union had always objected.
Wonderful though they are, however, these systems do have their limitations.
Consequently, the treaties count not the missiles themselves but the ‘launchers’ that is
the emplacements or the silos. From this derives the recent American anxiety that the
Soviet Union, quite legally under the letter of the treaty, might have a supply of extra
missiles as ‘reloads’. Contrariwise, the vast expense of the American MX system is
largely determined by the need to keep it compatible with verification. The SS-20, the
Backfire bomber, the cruise missile and other so-called ‘grey area systems’ have been
largely omitted from the SALT process, both because of their elusive technical
characteristics and their entanglement with regional powers and balances.
These difficulties seem far more serious to me than the complaints of American
hawks that the United States received a bad deal in the treaties. Despite a few biases
in favour of the Soviet Union, as in its unique quota of ‘heavy’ missiles, nothing in
the treaties prevents the United States maintaining a better strategic balance if it has
the will to do so. Much more worrying is the possibility that the complexities of the
balance are outstripping the techniques of negotiated control. Perhaps the SALT
treaties were a fluke. When negotiations began, Pravda wrote that it was ‘one of those
rare moments in history when both sides are ready to admit equality in the broadest
sense and to view this as an initial position for reaching agreement’. We can now see
that the moment may have been rarer than we thought; not the start of an era but a
passing occasion when divergent interests coincided just sufficiently for a ‘one-off’
deal.
Entering into over-simplified agreements about particular aspects of a complex
strategic environment, where politics and technology interact in ever-changing
patterns, entails the danger of losing the flexibility with which to adapt to change. The
prejudice against technological innovation, especially Western innovation, to which I

6

referred on an earlier occasion, offers a more generalised illustration of this danger.
This prejudice is turning Western defence policy into a series of running fights over
whatever is designated the ‘rogue weapon’ of the moment by the disarmament lobby
or by Soviet diplomacy. Ironically, secrecy spares the Soviet Union much of such
scrutiny. Soviet systems, often innovations themselves, as in the contemporary
example of anti-satellite technology, turn up as faits accomplis.
It is difficult to think of any other area of modern life in which so many people
assume that today’s technology is the best imaginable. In reality, much military
innovation is devoted to making weapons safer to handle or more amenable to control.
Recent American nuclear tests, for example, have perfected new detonating
components so that accidental explosions will be much less likely even than at
present. A complete test ban would have prevented this development. It is not
axiomatic, therefore, that that much heralded arms control proposal would indeed be
an unquestionable step towards a safer world. Indeed, a complete test ban strikes me
as a particularly over-confident proposal for freezing a critical part of the military
environment without any real knowledge of what the long-term effects would be.
While confidence in it as an anti-proliferation measure is limited by the fact that the
most likely candidates for nuclear status have refused to sign even the present partial
ban.
The rigidity you legislate today may deny you the evasive manoeuvre you want to
take tomorrow. In my view, therefore, the burden of proof is at least as much on those
who propose curbs on technology as on those who sponsor technological innovations.
In reality, I feel sure that the effort to freeze technology is in any case doomed to
failure—I can quote no less an authority than the late Marshal Grechko, former Soviet
Defence Minister, to this effect: ‘Today it is impossible to stand still. A characteristic
of our time is the stormy process of development, renewal and improvement in all
spheres of human activity, among them military affairs.’ The Marshal was, of course,
a military man. But in its yearbook for 1981, even the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute rejects the idea that man is being carried along on an irresistible
tide of technology. Technology, says the Institute, cannot be saddled with the blame
for a military competition that is really driven by political forces.
So far, I imagine, I have appeared to be pouring cold water on the idea of arms
control. The metaphor is tempting, considering all the waste heat the subject generates
these days. By pointing out some of the difficulties and limitations of arms control,
however, it is not my intention to debunk it. Rather, I want to suggest that its
undoubted potential can only be realised by providing a sound and realistic footing. if
the inherent limitations of arms control are ignored, then the defects of specific
proposals may be too lightly dismissed on the grounds that the ultimate prize of a
disarmed world justifies a few risks. This is happening with the current negotiations
over theatre nuclear weapons where the unattainable vision of a Europe free from
nuclear danger—and even a Europe with no nuclear weapons based in it would not be
that—fosters uncritical enthusiasm for any intermediate proposal.
Policies labelled ‘arms control’ should be scrutinised as carefully as any other
proposal to adjust the military balance. Equally, however, we should not reject an
arms control measure merely because it is modest, or not simplistically in accord with
the idea of disarmament. Indeed, I believe that as people come to appreciate the

7

difficulty of reconciling the internal complexity of the modern military scene with the
over-simplification and rigidity often required by diplomatic negotiation, we may see
a shift in arms control from what we might call ‘inputs’ to ‘outputs’. We begin to
realise that it is less important exactly what weapons the enemy has than what
capabilities they derive from them. So long as nuclear power does not have a clear
first-strike capability, for instance, it matters little whether he buys this or that missile.
A mutual agreement to avoid such overall effects and to maintain a dialogue about the
subject may be more practical in the long run than trying to achieve the same result by
an endless scurrying to outlaw each new device that was not thought of in the
previous agreement. The shift towards so-called ‘freedom to mix’ within negotiated
ceilings on armaments is a faltering step in this direction. In Europe, the shift in the
force reduction talks from force ceilings to what are called ‘confidence-building
measures’ may be another such move.
The legitimacy that the idea of arms control has conferred on international dialogue
about such matters is one of its most valuable contributions to making the military
balance safer. Perhaps the most important contribution of all is to disseminate a wide
sense of caution and restraint in confrontations between the nuclear powers. This
sense of caution is the strong but narrow basis on which the nuclear weapon may yet
enable us to build strategic moderation more firmly than our predecessors. The sense
of confidence and mutual understanding which may exist between adversaries for the
purpose of averting catastrophe will do so, however, only if we do not allow the
rhetoric of arms control to make us neglect the underlying balance of power that
creates our common interest in the first place. The caution that arms control requires
and facilitates needs to be observed as much in avoiding complacency as in avoiding
provocation.

8

