REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 5: The Anxious Object
TRANSMISSION: 8 December 1982 – Radio 4

Two years ago the critic Marina Vaizey wrote an essay on the language of art
criticism in which she reflected severely on those dictionaries of art which, as she
said, ‘do not criticise their subjects so much as praise them’. But the most revealing
passage in her essay reported that in a London art gallery one day she came upon what
she described as ‘a middle-aged pair doing the art gallery swoop’. In the swoop you
look at a painting and then bend down to see its title and the painter’s name. The
middle-aged pair were bending down to look at an electrical fitting, a complex of
wires and plugs which they evidently took for a work of art. They were searching for
the label. ‘So disoriented had this couple become,’ Lady Vaizey commented, ‘so
uncertain as to what was art and what wasn’t, that their eyes were taking in the
sculptural possibilities of electrical plugs and wires while looking for the label that
would validate their perceptions.’ ‘I can’t see what this is called,’ one said to the other
as Lady Vaizey passed by.
The conclusions Lady Vaizey drew from this episode seem to me wrong. She Implies
that she is free from the bewilderment she ascribes to the middle-aged pair. I don’t
think she is. She recently reviewed In the Sunday Times a work by Joseph Beuys,
exhibited in Anthony d’Offay’s gallery In London. It isn’t very clear from her account
of It that she has any notion of its character, or whether it is a work of art or not. She
assures her readers that Beuys is ‘a person of the utmost dedication, charm and
sincerity’. ‘The effect of Beuys’s work has an emotional effect,’ she says,
bewilderment stunning her sentence. In fact, she is in exactly the same degree of
disorientation as the middle-aged pair looking at the wires and plugs, except for one
privileged consideration: she knows the artist’s name and has already experienced,
apparently, his charm.
On the matter of dictionaries of art which do not criticise their subjects so much as
praise them; Lady Vaizey is not in a strong position. Some months ago she reviewed
an exhibition of Constructivist Art in Britain 1934.1940 and referred to certain
‘marvellous carvings, stone and wood, by Henry Moore’; some pieces by Barbara
Hepworth, and a few of Ben Nicholson’s white reliefs. But ‘Pride of place, even In
this company,’ she wrote, ‘must go to the daring, sizzlingly assured Piet Mondrian
Composition White and Red 1935).’ It’s hard to see how concentration of mind could
be compatible with such a sentence, or with Lady Vaizey’s recent description of
David Hockney as ‘an artist of sizzling and attractive Intelligence’. Now, It is possible
to describe a Mondrian painting as ‘assured’, if you Ignore the obsessive sense of
experience and the precautionary stance which found their embodiment in his
horizontals, verticals and primary colours; and if you ignore the sundry of experience
he felt driven to suppress. But what then remains of the assurance you have ascribed
to his composition? In any case, what force are we meant to give that word

1

‘sizzlingly’, which is evidently designed to drive into sublimity a sentence that began,
unpromisingly, with ‘pride of place’?
I mention this simply to document my surprise that any art critic can feel exempt,
these days, from a sense of Incapacity. Several years ago, one of the best and most
influential critics, Harold Rosenberg, acknowledged that the whole activity of art
criticism is confounded. ‘The status of art,’ he says, ‘has become uncertain. At least, it
is ambiguous. No one can say with assurance what a work of art is—or, more
important, what is not a work of art. Where an art object is still present, as in painting,
it is what I have called an anxious object: It does not know whether It is a masterpiece
or junk.’
So how should we proceed? Rosenberg didn’t say, what is obvious, that in many
Instances the artist’s name is essential. A painting by Mondrian is a Mondrian. We
look at it, knowing that it takes its place in that category. If you attend a performance
of Boulez’s Structures Ia, you probably bring to it a general sense of what his name
stands for and perhaps a more specific sense if you have heard two or three of his
works. That you are listening to a Boulez rather than a Stockhausen, a Maxwell
Davies or a Steve Reich Is part of the experience. You may even go to the trouble of
reading Gyorgy Ligeti’s analysis; In that case you’ll know that the system on which
Boulez wrote the piece is very elaborate. You won’t know whether it is good or not,
because Ligeti’s analysis is limited to explication. Presumably he thinks it good
enough to hold his professional interest, but apart from that consideration you’ll have
to wait for the evidence of your ear even to decide whether or not to pursue the
question of value.
The artist’s name hasn’t always been a necessary part of the aesthetic experience. In
the 16th century the name only indicated the point at which human genius manifested
itself: people were far more interested in the continuity of the power of genius than in
the individual person marked out to receive it. But since the beginning of the 19th
century the name has been the focus of attention to the Individuality of the artist.
Schumann praised Chopin mainly for the unmistakably personal quality of his music,
and thought it a mark of Chopin’s genius that his music, like a signature, was unlike
anyone else’s. An aesthetic experience demanded the disclosure of private feeling.
Artists who gave up the security and reserve of distance and chose rather to reveal
every nuance of their sensibility were rewarded for doing so. Liszt’s recitals were
lavish in the exchange of emotion. Liberal humanism has identified a work of art with
its author and valued the signs of genius uniquely his. Some critics maintain that the
age of liberal humanism is past and that reference to an artist’s genius is
mystification. But the correlation persists. When Andy Warhol was asked how he
would recognise a work of art, he said that whatever an artist does is a work of art.
When Marcel Duchamp exhibited in a gallery a bottle rack and a snow shovel bought
in a hardware shop, it was assumed that he meant to refute the supposed difference
between a standard commercial object and a work of art. But the bottle rack and snow
shovel were different in one respect: they had been chosen by an artist; his royal hand
had touched them. The same applies to Warhol’s famous tin of Campbell’s soup.
But the difference between the 19th and the 20th century in this regard is that in the
19th the work of art was still separable from the artist and it participated in forms and
genres to which specific criteria applied. Bottle racks, snow shovels and soup tins

2

embody intentions and gestures to which criteria don’t apply. All you can do with an
intention is entertain it. When Rosenberg said that it was no longer possible to say
what a work of art is or what is not a work of art, he meant that many works offered
as art no longer reveal in themselves the reasons why they are such: they disable
critical judgment by being arbitrary. The artist might say: precisely, that is the point,
to disable judgment and force upon people an entirely spectacular experience.
I suppose most people, if asked what art is, would say something along these lines. A
work of art is a work designed as such, even when a practical use is primarily
intended, as in architecture. It is offered to our perception as a work at once
expressive, formal and unified; offered in the hope of arousing and gratifying our
aesthetic sense, our sense of the beautiful in the manifestation of form. The relation
between the work of art and the given world may be close or distant. It may be close,
as in art which seeks to resemble, refer, allude or denote; or it may be so distant that it
shows more interest in the world as it might be or a world quite different from our
own than in the common world given to us in its appearances. Some forms of art, like
painting, sculpture or the novel, are comfortable with the possibility of resemblance:
others, like music, are not. The pleasure offered by a work of art is the pleasure of
understanding, an object for its own sake even though understanding can’t be more
than partial. A work of art is then admired for various reasons; for durability, in the
sense that it has survived, valued by generations of people who in one degree or
another have admired it; or it has shown notable power to move a wide range of
people, so that it is easy to believe that it testifies to some permanent feature of human
life. Or it is, for some reason, unique, even in its imperfection. No one seriously wants
to see the Venus de Milo restored, even though several artists have tried to imagine
what form its perfection took. Sometimes a work of art is valued for its originality;
though there is a critical argument that the appearances of originality are misleading,
and that the new is merely the old we have failed to recognise. Sometimes what we
admire in a work of art is its perfection, the ease with which it answers the formal
problems it has set.
These are the kind of assumptions one makes in a reasonable conversation about art.
And they are perfectly reasonable. But when we recite such considerations, we feel
that they are archaic to some of the current forms of art. The reason is that they all
sustain the idea of the work of art as a privileged object, valued because it is removed
from the normal wear and tear of daily life as a sign of its status. These works come
from a past that seems increasingly remote, and their presence among us is obtrusive.
If they are housed in galleries, you have to look at them with special gravity and
decorum. There may even be a touch of resentment that these things have not changed
as we have changed.
It is easy to resent the claim a famous work of art makes upon you: all that history, all
that glory. Some such feeling may have urged contemporary artists to suppress the
privilege of art; so they make their works of art not as durable objects but as events,
happenings or gestures. They want to call attention not to the object but to the
processes of art, which reveal themselves best in forms designed not to last; in
collages made of bits of paper, all the better if it is newspaper, made to be replaced
and forgotten. Still these are odd feelings. If we revolt against the object, we turn
against the past which has granted the privilege. Our sense of the past is intimidating
because we feel we have to be loyal to It. Maurice Blanchot has argued that societies

3

like to have finished works of art that can be admired as perfect and whose eternal
immobility can be contemplated in museums and concert halls; they like to have these
things so that people may be able to recognise themselves in works of art and feel that
there is continuity between past and present. If we don’t feel satisfied or comforted
when we go to an art gallery, it’s probably because we resent the walls of official
perfection we are required to admire.
Some years ago Lionel Trilling brought together a number of ideas which bear upon
this theme: ‘a diminished confidence in mind’, which he regarded as typical of our
time; ‘our diminished awareness of the past’ and ‘our disaffection from history’.
‘Mind is widely discredited,’ he maintained, ‘because it cannot be in an immediate
relation to experience, but must always stand merely proximate to it.’ He had in view
the sentiment which stipulates ‘that only those things are real, true and to be relied on
which are experienced without the intervention of rational thought’. The irritating
quality of mind is that it always comes after the event, and mostly in the form of a
rebuke. The reason why Romantic poets spoke rather of imagination and vision than
of mind is that imagination consorts with beginnings, it is spontaneous, creative; it
speaks of possibility rather than necessity. William Blake wrote: ‘Energy is the only
life; it issues from the body; and Reason is the bound and outward circumference of
Energy. Energy is eternal delight’; and Kant said that genius is ‘that innate disposition
of the temperament through which nature imposes its law on art’. In other words,
genius comes into art as a turbulence in its routine. By the criteria of genius and
energy, mind is bound to appear a tedious necessity. It seems always to play the older
brother in experience, if not the heavy father. And among the properties of mind the
most formidable and the most forbidding seems to be the power of judgment and
discrimination. Discrimination is the ‘delayed satisfaction’ of mind, which is itself the
delayed satisfaction of experience. No wonder they are hated by those who want their
experience to be direct and immediate, without thought of yesterday or the morrow.
These considerations may account for some changes in the status of the several arts.
The most popular arts these days are those which provide the most direct access to
their experiences. The question of the relative value of the experiences doesn’t seem
to be raised: it is as if what people want of any experience is chiefly Its immediacy,
and would settle for experiences which have that quality and nothing much else.
Music encourages people to believe that it is possible to dissolve all the tensions
involved in personal and social relations, and to enter into the possession of
experience so intimately that words are not required. All the better because words are
not required. The appeal of dance is related to an ideal unity of experience, verified by
the human body, its animation, gestures, identity and movement; by the relation
between the body and the earth on which it moves. Equally, in dance, the partnering
of dancers testifies to a personal and communal sense of life, freed from the
tendentiousness of language and the equivocal luxury of entirely private feeling.
Music and dance alike hold out the possibility of universal experience—free from the
rational necessity which is accepted in speech. In this sense, each art promises
particular satisfactions. Painting and sculpture promise the sense of presence, of a
thing being completely at one with itself, fully what it is, without yielding to a
demand for explanation. Sculpture, in particular, promises us a relation to the material
world such that it no longer seems primitive or intractable. The same sense is
developed more explicitly in architecture, which holds out the possibility of achieving
complete harmony between nature and culture; of so being at home in the world that

4

our houses and public buildings will seem as natural as the ground they occupy.
Architecture, being a public art, also offers relief from the demands of subjectivity: a
successful public building allows us to feel that society is our proper home and that
civic life can provide satisfactions, not merely frustrations. Photography appeases the
desire to take immediate possession of our experience; not indeed as a whole but as
the sum of its separately manageable parts. When life is most keenly felt as
miscellaneous and formless, it’s a relief to see it under picturesque control, held in
focus when it most threatens to fly off hi several directions. The importance of the
Polaroid camera is that it removes the delay between the experience and Its image,
increasing the owner’s sense of immediate possession.
By these comparisons, literature offers no immediacy at all. Its medium is language,
so it is compromised by questions of meaning, definition and syntax. Literature, for
these reasons, is always belated. Language is full of gaps; the gap between a thing and
the word for it, the insecurity that remains even when you have settled upon the word,
the gap between the words and the system they inhabit. There are poems in which the
words seem to revel in their relations to one another, and to neglect their official
meanings. There is a use of language which seems opaque rather than transparent.
When Eliot writes in Gerontion;
what will the spider do,
Suspend its operations, will the weevil
Delay?
There is no point in detaching these questions from their context or expecting that,
even in context, they might be answered. But, in any case, it is impossible to place
words close to primacy experience. Think of ‘automatic writing’, which tries to use
words in such a way as to forestall the intervention of mind or systematic thought. It
is always ludicrous. These gestures have more point as Rorschach episodes in
psychology. Or, in painting, Robert Klein has pointed out that abstract art implies a
way of being in the world as if one had given up relying upon the certainty of objects
and the completeness of nature. That’s why the Abstract Expressionist painter paints
before he reflects; because reflection entails recourse to everything he wants to evade,
to punish or to subdue; ideas, objects, the whole apparatus of a given world. So it’s
not surprising that Surrealism has been more compelling in paint than in words. It’s
hard to prevent words from referring to other things; they run, as if by nature, to make
the kind of sense which is implied in grammar, syntax and argument. The tendency
can be deflected, as in the literature of nonsense, but you have to deform the words, as
in Lewis Carroll and Edward Lear, and you have to play fast and loose with syntax,
otherwise the words will go straight to their old ways. But paint doesn’t harbour a
preference for allusion or representation; the relation between paint and canvas is free
of grammar, so it is easy to set hand, brush and paint in motion as if the hand were
disconnected from the mind.
It may seem that the attempt to disconnect the hand from the mind is perverse, but it
arises from a motive that has been common in the arts at least for the past two
hundred years. Jacques Maritain described it by saying that ‘Art, once bitten by
poetry, longs to be freed from reason.’ The sentence calls upon an ancient tradition in
which the artist is associated with divine madness, inspiration, enthusiasm and
ecstasy. Instead of copying nature or the cultured object, he was supposed to trust his

5

genius—no matter where it led him. He was more important than any object he
painted, because he was inspired. In the story of Pygmalion, the sculptor made an
ivory statue of a woman so beautiful that he fell in love with his own creation. But the
statue remained cold until Aphrodite took pity on Pygmalion; and one day, while
pressing the inert statue in his arms, he felt the ivory suddenly move; his kisses were
returned. The statue had come alive. Reason would have discouraged Pygmalion from
such a dreadful art, or would have argued him into a more disinterested sense of his
own creation. But reason is extravagant in its own way: it imposes a more stringent
degree of order than our experience requires; its talent is administrative rather than
creative. The trick is to destroy our devils without destroying our angels. Reason
would destroy both sets, just to make sure. So when we talk about the revulsion
against reason in the last two hundred years, we can improve its reputation by saying
that it is an attempt to speak up for whatever reason would suppress: dreams, the
unconscious, the anarchy of pure behaviour the immediacy of instinct and intuition.
The motive I am describing appears in many forms, some more charming than the
rest. One of the most charming appears in John Cage, a composer who entertains
noise as willingly as silence; he is quiet by temperament and now by conviction.
When Richard Kostelanetz asked Cage why he composed, since music is merely
‘random sound experience’, he answered: The first thing you have to do is not ask the
question “why? “. Look at your environment, which you are enjoying, and see if it
asks why. You’ll see that it doesn’t. This custom of asking “why” is the same as
asking which is the most, or which is the best. They are very closely related questions
that enable you to disconnect yourself from your experience, rather than to identify
with it.’
Cage bases his experience on a vision of endless landscape, in which there is room for
everything and everyone; it is the American version of pastoral: the world according
to nature, in which conflicts are resolved by accommodating them in space. But the
most revealing part of Cage’s answer is the notion of not interrupting the immersion
of ourselves in our experience by asking questions. Particularly, he doesn’t want to
ask the question of value, because discrimination is possible only by moving out from
the level on which we live, the level of process. You can’t compare one thing with
another while immersed in either. You have to hold them at arm’s length, or at mind’s
length, to judge them at all.
Cage’s sentiment is common in criticism of the arts. You find it again in those who
propose a theory of performance rather than a theory of knowledge; that artistic
excellence is measured by the degree to which a painting or a poem incorporates
knowledge about the world. The problem with a theory of knowledge is that it
separates subject and object, to begin with, whatever it does thereafter. A theory of
performance is best fulfilled in the arts of dance, film and theatre, and more generally
in action and gesture, where there is no separation between subject and object. In
dance, we have an art in which ‘body is not bruised to pleasure soul’. There is no
question of an observing subject separated from what he observes, according to
procedures recognised in the theory of perspective and ‘point of view ‘. The revolt
against reason, in this context, entails a desire not to observe life but to perform one’s
own life. The question of self and role-playing remains unanswered, but the art of
performance makes available at least a provisional form of unity. The dancer and the
dance are one.

6

The sentiment I’m describing represents a shift in the sense of the arts from meaning
to force. Meaning can be given in sentences, it can be translated, it is a companion to
reason. But force is not. Force is like the energy of the human body, it is like
adrenalin. In the arts, force is inescapably active in the dance in ballet, which delights
in the energy of bodies and the kind of experience it makes possible. Force and
mystery are alike because they refuse to identify themselves with reason, but
thereafter they differ. Force is the aboriginal power that comes before every show of
reason and tries to forestall it. Mystery is what remains after reason, when reason has
done its best and its worst; it’s what was always there, but unacknowledged, till
reason tried to explain it and the explanation, good as far as it went, was puerile
thereafter.
The revulsion against reason has rarely been so explicit as in Susan Sontag’s essay
‘Against Interpretation’. Sontag isn’t opposed to interpretation in the Nietzschean
sense that everything is interpretation: ‘there are no facts, only interpretations’. But
she is opposed to the modern style of interpretation in which, as in Freud, a hidden
content is to be revealed by dislodging the obvious content. She regards interpretation,
in this sense, as yet another example, to use my own terms, of the suppression of force
by reason. ‘Interpretation,’ she says, is ‘the revenge of the intellect upon art.’ By
interpreting, we set up a shadow-world of meanings at the expense of the world and
its appearances. In the middle of the 19th century, Henry Adams worried that
American intellect wouldn’t be able to catch up with American energy: be thought the
new forms of energy, dynamos and machinery wonderful, but they also terrified him:
he revered intellect, but couldn’t feel sure that the forms it took would be the ones
needed in the new circumstances. Sontag has the opposite fear. She is afraid that the
intellect has already established a genteel tradition so obtrusive and canonical that
energy hasn’t a chance. In that sense, Sontag is against profundity, which makes a
claim upon depth as opposed to surface. What she warts to retain is not depth but
intricacy of appearances.
Sontag’s theory says ‘let it be’. As an aesthetic, this has more problems than she has
acknowledged. It favours diversity of recognition rather than discrimination. When
she prefers one film to another, the reason for the preference Is rarely clear: she relies
on taste, or a flair she claims for knowing the best. Her attitude is like the one Sir John
Pope-Hennessy expresses when he grounds his criticism of art upon connoisseurship.
He has spoken of ‘the mysterious moment at which intuition becomes belief’. Clearly
he means the moment at which my Intuition becomes my belief. But this is just the
same as saying ‘one is a connoisseur, or one isn’t’. And that means putting the
mystery where we certainly don’t want it to be, in the nature or privileged talent of the
critic. But there is no reason to give up interpreting merely because it is liable to
vanity and pretentiousness. To interpret means to make sense or to recover whatever
sense the work has made. There is always a temptation, as Wittgenstein said, to try to
make the spirit explicit. What we need now is something for which there isn’t a
precise word; a form of interpretation in which conviction is compatible with the
misgiving that should accompany it.

7

