REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 6: A Talent for Conviction
TRANSMISSION: 15 December 1982 – Radio 4

The accusations that some modern critics have been making against society amount to
this, that it is a liar; it goes out of its way to prevent us from knowing the truth. But I
would bring a different charge, that society is guilty of presumption; it presumes to
know what reality is, and that it can be fully represented in plain sense and ordinary
language without admitting mystery. It assumes that metaphor is only a selfbewildering perversion of a literal truth, and that symbolism is an illicit attempt to
endow ordinary things with a radiance which then testifies to their meaning and their
value. When I talk about society, I mean such a society as our own, which claims to
be free, liberal, and pluralist. The claim is, on the whole, justified, especially if
comparisons are made with societies which don’t even bother to present themselves as
free. But the ideology which makes our society what it is and keeps it in that state has
prescribed certain forms of life by representing them as norms: it claims to know the
point at which culture may be distinguished from barbarism, and it enforces ways of
speaking which make the point of distinction clear. Deviation is permitted only if it is
trivial, inept or otherwise innocuous.
The one risk our society isn’t prepared to take is the risk of confessing that it doesn’t
know what reality is, or what distinguishes fact from illusion. It isn’t willing to admit
that, as the poet Wallace Stevens said, ‘the squirming facts exceed the squamous
mind’. A thing is squamous when it consists of thin, overlapping parts, like the scales
of a fish, so a squamous mind is one in which perceptions and axioms are joined
together like scales or discs or laminations. If the squirming facts exceed such a mind,
it’s because they overwhelm its categories. It reminds me of a warning passage in
Mann’s novel Doctor Faustus in which the narrator Zeitblom says of liberal theology
that while it is an advocate of culture and ready to adapt itself to the ideals of
bourgeois society, ‘it degrades the religious to a function of the human; the ecstatic
and paradoxical elements so essential to the religious genius it waters down to an
ethical progressiveness…it lacks insight into the daemonic character of human
existence.’
The conventional response to this is that the daemonic character of human existence is
merely a vestigial infirmity, that we should have outgrown it and that, in any case, it
can be explained away by psychological discourse. There is a passage in Kenneth
Burke’s Prologue in Heaven, a dialogue between the Lord and Satan, where the Lord
tells Satan that mystery is inescapable in so far as temporal, factual knowledge is
necessarily fragmentary.But he then says that mystery can be useful in worldly
government. ‘For, once a believer is brought to accept mysteries, he will be better
minded to take orders without question from those persons whom he considers
authoritative. So, mysteries are a good grounding for obedience, in so far as the
acceptance of a mystery involves a person in the abnegation of his personal
judgments.’ If we give the argument a further twist, we can say that priests keep the

1

mysteries going to maintain themselves in power; or that artists and critics insist upon
the ineffable in art for a similar disgraceful reason, to keep the workers in their lowly
place.
But the argument is specious. A good priest doesn’t claim to know more than other
people; he is a celebrant, not a consultant. He acknowledges mystery, but doesn’t
claim access to it: his mind is concentrated upon ritual, sacrifice and the sacraments.
Artists and critics shouldn’t claim to know mystery, but to be open to its action upon
them. Acknowledgement of mystery doesn’t mean that we sacrifice our intelligence
for some higher cause or that we cultivate the exotic pleasure of believing in
something because it’s impossible. Wittgenstein put this well by saying that ‘what is
inexpressible—what I find mysterious and am not able to express—is the background
against which whatever I could express has its meaning.’ I take Wittgenstein’s
‘whatever I could express’ as corresponding to criticism. It is what we can do. But the
background is the limit of criticisms; we come upon it at the point where words fail.
Now the artist is certainly closer to the edge than a critic, closer to the edge of
mystery. An artist doesn’t know more things or even different things, but he has a
special way of knowing what he knows, an unofficial way if the official way is
secular and rationalist.
I think T. S. Eliot spoke well for poetry and the arts when he referred to ‘the auditory
imagination’ and described it as the feeling for syllable and rhythm, penetrating far
below the conscious levels of thought and feeling, invigorating every word; sinking to
the most primitive and forgotten, returning to the origin and bringing something back,
seeking the beginning and the end. It works through meanings, certainly, or not
without meanings in the ordinary sense, and fuses the old and obliterated and the trite,
the current and the new and surprising, the most ancient and the most civilised
mentality’
We need, then, the variety and latitude of the arts not to provide us with a good
choice, but to make available the sense of an indefinitely large range of experience
other than our own, and of different ways of apprehending it. In theory, these acts of
imagination should work in us towards livelier sympathies with other people. They
may do that in practice. But often they don’t. It may happen that the work towards
more active sympathy is thwarted in us by more immediate drives and compulsions.
We can’t safely assume that reading a great novel will do us some kind of good or
activate our moral sense. There’s no point in being scandalised by reports that
commandants in Auschwitz worked all day at their monstrous jobs and went back to
their quarters in the evening to listen to Bach or Mozart. There’s no scandal. The
claims made for the arts, by which they would undertake the duties of priests or
otherwise pursue an ethical purpose, are spurious. The relation between the aesthetic
sense and the ethical sense is a matter of speculation; there may be no such relation.
Or it may be inordinately attenuated by the fact that we conduct our lives on the
principle of the division of labour. In any case, reading a good novel won’t cure a
headache or otherwise improve our temper or disposition.
But it can do one thing: it can enliven in us the sense of the unique presence of objects
which come into the world because artists have created them. While we are aware of
these objects we live for the time being according to a rhythm of interest quite
different from our normal rhythm of competition and survival. An experience is

2

aesthetic when the main quality of it is appreciation, not possessiveness. When we
want to possess the object, we have passed into a different sense of it.
But the pleasure of the experience isn’t frivolous or casual; it’s intelligent pleasure,
not only because it arises in the act of consciousness but because one has a complex
sense of the relation between the achieved work of art and the factors which go to
make its achievement problematic. It’s almost a definition of modern art that it is
based upon difficulty; not in the sense that every modern work of art is difficult —
many of them aren’t—but rather that the general context of the arts is of difficulty not
local but categorical Henry James said of Flaubert that ‘his case was a doom because
he felt of his vocation almost nothing but the difficulty’. The difficulty takes many
forms. A poet may feel that the words available to him aren’t right, and that they are
compromised rather than enriched by the standard wisdom they have been made to
serve: that they are ‘last year’s words’. A composer may feel, as Sir William Walton
does, that all the great tunes have been found and used up. A painter may feel that his
work is arbitrary, that it has no authority apart from his own assertiveness.
It sometimes appears that modern criticism knows art only as difficulty, and that it has
failed to calibrate difficulty, pleasure and value. The typical stance of the
contemporary critic is one of irony: he is the one who knows that we are all
bamboozled; he knows the malice of bourgeois ideology, the spuriousness of
metaphysics, the idiocy of our desire to ground history upon an intentional origin,
whether it is God or a particular concept of man. Indeed, there are two missing factors
in contemporary criticism. The first is a set of principles which would renew or
establish a sense of value in what we read and look at and hear; which would help us
to discriminate between the thousands of objects and events which claim our serious
attention. The second is the’ conviction from which such a set of principles would
emerge. Yeats once told Lionel Johnson that he didn’t know one member of his
generation who practised a talent for conviction. He meant, indeed, religious
conviction, and had in view the combined forces of doubt, misgiving, fear and
vacillation which undermine conviction while keeping people in need of it. But if we
secularise the phrase a little, we find it applies also to conviction as a force in the
criticism of the arts. The only stance to which critics ascribe any point today is that of
the ironic, disillusioned observer, observing objects supposed to be ideologically
corrupted through and through, and wondering from time to time how he alone has
escaped to tell the dismal tidings.
More specifically, I’m thinking of the loss of confidence in any assumption of
continuity between past and present. Some critics are interested in echoes and
allusions, between one moment in history and another, but they don’t believe that
these testify to any large integration. There is a corresponding loss of belief in a
relation between form and detail. While we normally assume that the period of
Existentialism has ended, it still persists in a common assumption of contingency; that
the lived experience is unintelligible, that the detail of life is independent of any form
supposedly found in it. Of course we can distance this sense of contingency a little by
saying that it is only the perennial problem of finding a relation between fact and
value. But the contemporary forms of scepticism are peculiarly dreary, as if they
feared that, in a moment’s inattention, they would find themselves leaping into faith.
Meanwhile, the human faculties which are privileged in society are those of
measurement and calculation. The pleasure of understanding is explicit in certain

3

currents of criticism from Coleridge to Barthes, but it’s still an exotic element in our
serious vocabulary. On the far more casual level of thought, represented by writers
like Bernard Levin, pleasure is offered as a substitute for understanding, and .i value
as a critical term has virtually disappeared.
There are several ways for critics to set aside the discriminating impulse. They can
hand over the entire question to time; on the easy assumption that time will make the
right decision in each case. Some works of art have survived, so there must have been
good reason for their survival. Or the spirit of the age will assert itself and favour
those works in which it is embodied. Even when the spirit changes, those works will
have entered the history of the arts and will be safe there. The assumption that time
will tell is quite reasonable if you are prepared to wait long enough, but it consigns us
to the infirmity of not knowing what we’re doing in the meantime. The critic can say,
with the post-Structuralist, that the distinctions between one work and another are of
no account compared to the disability they all share; the only difference is between
artists, such as Bataille and Blanchot, who know that their illness is fatal, and other
artists, who don’t even know that they are sick.
Mostly, though, critics have lost interest in particular works of art except as evidence
of a political case to be made and, unfortunately, repeated.
They are only interested in describing the system that makes the production of
meanings possible, what Barthes called the empty meaning that sustains all meanings.
For such an interest, one work of art is just as good as another. Early Structuralist
critics studied the James Bond novels, so that they wouldn’t be distracted by questions
of quality and value. A critic is, as Donald Davie has well said, ‘Someone who
discriminates among pleasures so as to sharpen them for himself, and others.’ But
there aren’t many such around.
These are some of the forces which have diverted criticism of the arts from its proper
concern, the discrimination of intelligible pleasures. One of them is especially
suggestive, the idea of criticism as writing, an independent activity released from its
service to literature and the arts. In practice, such critics rarely separate themselves
entirely from the work of art, but their relation to it is loose, they really want to go
their own way. ‘To move from reading to criticism,’ Barthes said, ‘is to change
desires; it is no longer to desire the work but to desire one’s own language.’ Indeed,
much ostensibly theoretic writing in criticism is better understood as autobiography,
political rhetoric, or ‘musing the obscure’. Once this desire is recognised, the only
category to be invoked is taste.
For a long time now it has been impossible to appeal to taste as providing a criterion:
taste was in every respect disabled, too subjective, too capricious to be more than
personally applicable. It belonged to one’s private life. But taste is coming back again,
mainly as a patrician attribute which produces its results without the plebeian labour
of earning them, In Barthes, for example, criticism became what it has only rarely
been, subjective and epicurean. Barthes wanted, especially in his last books, a
sensuous relation to phenomena rather than an ethical discrimination of their qualities
or consequences. He made room for subjectivity, so long as it was his own. He was
not really interested in discriminating between pleasures but in providing more of
them, and in showing that it is possible to take diverse pleasure even in a world we are

4

supposedly ready to declare miserable. We can interpret pleasure as a more or less
continuous satisfaction or, as in Barthes’s writing, a momentary bliss: in his case it
depends upon a savour, a glance, a phrase. In such epicurean forms it goes with the
cult of the fragment, not the large-scale work but the sentence. Style appears as a
flicker of eloquence; it accompanies the refusal to be great. Judgment and
discrimination are disavowed because they imply an aspiration to completeness which
is distasteful to patricians. In judgment and discrimination, the detail is chosen only
for its representative force and never for the extractable pleasure it provides.
But why am I insisting on judgment and discrimination in our relation to the arts: it
can hardly be that the attitude they denote is agreeable? It is truism that most of our
actions are enforced in one degree or another, if only by custom and habit. The
aesthetic experience is one of the few in which freedom can still be practised. It is
also one of the few on which public or social life does not obtrude. But the main
reason for insisting is that our engagement with a work of art is incomplete unless it
goes beyond appreciation. I distinguish between aesthetic appreciation and critical
discrimination. Appreciation involves absorption in the work, a pause in one’s life to
enjoy something other than itself. Discrimination moves the experience beyond itself
into a phase of cognition, analysis and action; it’s what R. P. Blackmur meant in
saying that critical judgment is ‘the last act in bringing particular works of art to full
performance’. It is by its culmination in judgment and discrimination that our
absorption in the work is brought into the civic context which it shares now with other
experiences. Without that completion, the experience remains what It was, a pause,
time out. The clearest sign of completion is that we are prepared to discuss our
principles and discriminations with others. Kant maintained that a judgment of taste
which says that a work of art is beautiful makes a proper claim to be universally valid
because our satisfaction is purely disinterested; we’re not planning to use the work of
art. For that reason, a man speaks of the beautiful as if beauty were a quality of the
object in question, rather than a mere projection of his own desire for beauty. The
conditions under which we discuss such experiences are far harder now than they
were in Kant’s day: it’s hard to have more than a casual conversation touching upon
such matters as beauty, form, or taste. These terms are so unfamiliar to us that they
cause embarrassment.
But it is too soon to give up the possibility. Speaking of hearing and seeing, Northrop
Frye said that the word listened to and acted upon is the starting-point of a course of
action: the visible object brings one to a respectful halt in front of it’. I would hope
that the halt in front of the work of art would accept every challenge it offered and
acknowledge for all the arts, at the end, what Flannery O’Connor said of fiction that it
is concerned ‘with mystery that is lived; ultimate mystery as we find it embodied in
the concrete world of sense experience’. And then a talent for conviction brings the
experience into the world of speaking and listening.
The best paradigm I can think of for conviction is the speaking of a poem. We
normally meet a poem on the printed page, in a book of poems, or a magazine. We
read it first with the eye and the mind in conjunction. If we try, we can probably hear
some of the phrases, as a musician by looking at a score can hear, at least to some
extent, how it goes. But mostly, the reading is still silent. Normally we go through the
poem, taking it as it seems to want to be taken, stopping if the going gets hard,
puzzling it out. Parts of it may be ambiguous. We don’t know exactly what goes with

5

what, or where the syntax is taking us. Sometimes it seems simple enough, but there
are more choices of meaning than we want. Eliot’s ‘Whispers of Immortality’ begins:
Webster was much possessed by death
And saw the skull beneath the skin;
And breastless creatures under ground
Leaned backward with a lipless grin.
Was Webster possessed by death as a lover is possessed by his beloved; or as a soul is
said to be possessed by a devil; or merely as a scholar or even a 17th- century
dramatist might be possessed by a theme, held by its possibilities? Are these
breastless creatures underground leaning back in a gesture as if sexually compliant, or
‘in order to have their laugh out,’ as William Empson thinks, ‘and to look upward at
the object of their laughter’? As long as we are reading the poem silently, taking the
words on the page, we can mull over these questions and, if we like, leave them
undecided. But if we read the poem aloud, as I’ve had to do, we have to settle for one
interpretation rather than another. Our voices insist upon speaking with particular
emphasis upon some words or syllables rather than others.
Whatever reading you decide on, there is always misgiving; you are aware of the
other meanings that are possible. But in a convincing reading you have to convince
yourself that one interpretation is, on balance, richer than another. Even then, you
have to lean and hearken to the words, trying to catch the sound of their sense. Then
the mind settles upon an interpretation, and the voice steadies itself in its favour. This
account of how we read a poem is meant to suggest the way in which we should
attend to any work of art. Entertaining different possibilities but finally committing
ourselves to one.
That’s a reason why there is no point in comparing the arts with games, or even with
language-games. A game has rules which the players and spectators accept. If you
play soccer or watch a soccer match, you know what constitutes a goal, and how one
is scored; you know the off-side rule, and what a foul means. You may not agree with
the referee’s application of these rules, but that confirms the rules rather than
infringing them. If you play chess, you know the rules and fulfil them. In an otherwise
uncertain world, games are desirable because they provide the experience of certainty.
The only certainty in the arts is that everything that happens in them is in parenthesis.
In La Bohème, Mimi dies only in brackets; it is all ‘as if’ she died. We know this, but
Rodolfo doesn’t, because he, too, lives in parentheses. This is different, though not
totally different, from a hypothetical situation that might be offered, conversationally,
for our judgment. Just suppose that such and such were to happen. In the play or the
opera, the feelings are so presented that we take them as if they were real, while also
knowing that they are imaginary. In New York a few years ago, I saw, in the Whitney
Gallery, a sculpture of a foot-sore woman resting herself heavily on a chair just inside
the door. The work was so extraordinarily realistic that I didn’t know, and for quite a
while couldn’t decide whether it was a sculpture or a real foot-sore woman. This was
unsettling, because part of an aesthetic experience is knowing that it is one, that the
parentheses of form are in place. We have to know that we are dealing with imaginary
objects, even while we’re responding to them as if they were real. The poet Marianne
Moore had something like this in mind when she said that poets should present

6

‘imaginary gardens with real toads in them’. The gardens are imaginary, but I
wouldn’t want to associate them too easily with the processes of fantasy and daydreaming. Neither fantasy nor day-dreaming will ever produce a work of art. The
imaginary objects of art are not pretences, they are proposed as not being real, but
their relation to the real may be one of likeness or difference in nearly any degree.
The same equivocal character obtains in judging the arts. The judgments we make of
them have the advantage of being disinterested, because the fact that their objects are
imaginary removes them from our ordinary needs and desires. But this
disinterestedness is challenged at every point, as in King Lear or La Bohème, by
sympathies and revulsions which nearly break through the conventions by which the
artistic events appear at all. It is easier to declare an object as imaginary than to feel
an emotion as imaginary. So our judgments of a work of art are different, though not
totally different, from those we make in ordinary life, where the parentheses are
removed and we judge in terms of local interests and needs. The arts are at once real
and unreal; and, in responding to them, we are at once detached and involved. Their
significance, the way in which they become present to us, arises from that strange set
of conditions.
There’s a corresponding doubleness in the way we value the arts. In one sense they
are trivial. If you’re hungry or in pain, no work of art will help you; though, when the
pain is over, a poem or a symphony may help to express what you feel. When Emily
Dickinson writes, ‘After great pain a formal feeling comes’, you may know that
formality, that stiffness or congealment, better for her saying it. But while you’re in
pain, the poem is no help. Robert Frost said that the theme of poetry is ‘how to
surmount the pressure upon us of the material world’. But if the pressure is acute or
painful, poetry is helpless. I want to put the case differently. Let’s concede that in one
way the arts are useless: they won’t cure a toothache. But in another way they are
really momentous, because they provide for spaces in which we can live in total
freedom. Think of it as a page. The main text is central, it is the text of need, of food
and shelter, of daily preoccupations and duties, jobs, keeping things going. This text is
negotiated mostly by convention, routine, habit, duty; we have very little choice in it.
So long as we are in this text, we merely coincide with our ordinary selves. If the
entire page were taken up with that text, we would have to live according to its
conventional rhythms, even in our leisure hours; because those, too, are subject to
conventions.
The arts are on the margin, and it doesn’t bother me to say that they are marginal.
What bothers me are the absurd claims we make for them. I want to say that the
margin is the place for those feelings and intuitions which daily life doesn’t have a
place for, and mostly seems to suppress. And the most important intuition is of
mystery as, what Eliot called ‘the ground of our beseeching’. Even in a world mostly
secular, the arts can make a space for our intuition of mystery, which isn’t at all the
same thing as saying that the arts are a substitute for religion. There is nothing in art
or in our sense of art which corresponds to my belief in God. In religion, our faith and
love are directed beyond ourselves. In art, faith doesn’t arise. It’s enough that the arts
have a special care for those feelings and intuitions which otherwise are crowded out
in our works and days.

7

With the arts, people can make a space for themselves, and fill it with intimations of
freedom and presence.

8

