REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 4: A Cherishing Bureaucracy
TRANSMISSION: 1 December 1982 – Radio 4

If you wanted to neutralise the arts and remove their mystery, the best strategy would
be to reduce them to psychology and politics, and then apply to them the secular
techniques of management, to show that they are, at least in that respect, like any
other activity. This is exactly what has happened. But I shouldn’t make it sound too
sinister. Michel Foucault and other critics have interpreted this sentiment as in every
way reprehensible: they see in modern societies a determination to constrain every
human impulse and they allege that the most typical institutions of society are the law
courts, the prisons, insane asylums and bureaucracy, rather than the Red Cross. I
prefer to think that modern societies insist on understanding every impulse, if
necessary by procedures extremely reductive, but that they are not obsessed by
images of constraint. Foucault’s argument is too global to be convincing. But I have
to concede that modern societies have a surprising interest in assimilating the arts;
you would have thought that the arts could safely be allowed to go their own way. In a
sense, of course, they are. But saying this reminds me of the anger young people in
the Sixties felt towards ‘benevolent paternalism’. Fathers were kind, warm-hearted,
generous enough to subsidise a social revolution, but their motives were suspect; they
were especially tender in the hope that their children would not strike them. The
question is: do modern societies domesticate the arts because they can’t bear not to
comprehend them, or because they are determined to keep everything under control?
Foucault goes for the extreme answer; I want to keep the question open.
I’ve stressed the reductive motive, thinking especially of psychology and politics, but
there’s one part of psychoanalytical theory which supports my argument that the
typical social act is the elimination of mystery by reducing reality to forms in which it
may be administered. It is Jacques Lacan’s distinction between desire and need. What
corresponds in the human psyche to mystery in the arts is what he calls ‘desire’,
which is desire only because it is unconscious and ineffable. What he calls ‘need’ is a
drive that can be met like hunger or thirst. It is a specific detail of compulsion, your
body would protest if you didn’t satisfy it. But desire is lack; it can’t be met, because
it is categorical and therefore endless. It is the condition of life as such, not a
particular craving which can be satisfied. The distinction corresponds to the one
between mystery and problem. The management of the arts is a system by which it is
pretended that desire is the same as need and may be appeased by money and fame. If
it were successful, it would complete the secularisation of their spirituality, a process
well established in the universities, where the most radical arts are taught, defined and
assimilated.
Some years ago, Lionel Trilling taught the course in modern literature at Columbia
College, choosing major works by Yeats, Eliot, Joyce, Proust, Kafka, Lawrence,
Mann and Conrad; works which meant much to him because of the questions they
pose for one’s moral life. But he found that teaching these works had the effect of

1

calming them, drawing them into a process of recognition and acceptance. He found,
too, that students were quite willing to take part in this process: they looked into the
abyss opened up by Conrad’s Heart of Darkness and came back undaunted. By the
time these great works had been put through the routines of discussion, commentary,
examination papers and grades, they had lost their power to hurt, and their power to
sustain had become mechanical.
The administration of the arts begins with the moment in which we give them their
names. As soon as you think of something as a sculpture, you have a slot for it: it’s
because the word ‘sculpture’ is available that we can talk about it. The object may
challenge these considerations or refute them, but at least they are there. The next
stage in management is the assignment of a place. Certain works of art are given a
place in public recognition, certain buildings are set aside for them: galleries, concert
halls, in London the South Bank as an artistic ghetto. These are special places, secular
temples; when you enter, you lower your voice. And bureaucracy determines not just
what will be seen but how it will be seen. A sculpture exhibited in a gallery offers a
certain experience: if it were in a shopping centre or a field, it would raise questions
about art and nature which an art gallery doesn’t raise. In a gallery, everything is
already culture. While you’re there, you don’t think about art and nature, or whether
the diverse claims of each have been conciliated, you don’t even think about art as an
enhancement of your environment. A gallery is not the best place to look at paintings,
precisely because it is the best place to study the history of art; for the same reason
that people become interested in ‘comparative religion’ when they have given up
believing in any of the religions they compare.
Works of art come into galleries and concert halls sometimes by one man’s decision
but more often by official patronage. Patronage is the Berenson of our time, and its
commonest name is the Arts Council or Mobil oil or words to that effect. These days,
it tends to come from a committee or a network of advisory committees. I don’t
automatically assume, by the way, that a decision taken by a committee is wrong and
that one taken by an individual is right. Institutions have had a bad press. Critics who
have written about academics, whether Russian, French, British or whatever, have
maintained that such institutions are the instruments of official power; that they are
designed, as John Berger says, ‘to ensure the continuation of a traditional
homogeneous art reflecting the state ideology’, whether that ideology is conservative
or progressive. The academy, he says, ‘centralises all artistic activity and regularises
all standards and judgments…and the rules, instead of being deduced from particular
examples or models at hand, are now induced as abstractions which schematise and
inhibit the artist’s imagination before he even begins to work’.
Now, I’m sure some academies have done precisely that. When Sir Joshua Reynolds,
Benjamin West, Gainsborough and other artists persuaded King George III to
establish the Royal Academy in 1768, they had an interest in stabilising art by
prescribing its rules. ‘Every opportunity should be taken,’ Reynolds said, ‘to
discountenance the false and vulgar opinion that rules are the fetters of genius. They
are fetters only to men of no genius; as that armour, which upon the strong is an
ornament, cripples the body which it was made to protect.’ But the situation has
changed in ways which may not be an improvement. I don’t believe that modern
academies are trying to maintain a traditional, homogeneous art reflecting the state
ideology. The only serious, documented attack on the Arts Council in this matter,

2

during the past few years, so far as its dealing with painting is an issue, has accused
the Council of favouring one school of art: minimal, post-Constructivist abstraction. It
has been argued that the same few artists keep coming up as prize-winners, the same
few galleries are given something like official acknowledgement, and that the Council
has largely ignored good artists who work in realist or figurative styles. Now, it might
be possible to see some connection between minimal, post-Constructivist abstraction
and the governments in office during the past several years, but I doubt it.
It is more probable that in a pluralist ethos, a slight push in one direction rather than
another is enough to set things moving. It’s hard to believe that there are strong
ideological forces at work which issue in the promotion of Victor Burgin or Stuart
Brizley. I deduce from the evidence not the lesson that John Berger has drawn in such
ominous terms but the far more serious conclusion: that the state isn’t interested in
any style, and that, if it has to choose one, it settles readily enough for the most avantgarde style it can find, subject to a time-lag of a couple of years. What the state seems
to be saying is: artists can do whatever they like, because nothing they do makes any
difference to anyone. The advantage of choosing an avant-garde style of some kind is
that the state can’t then be accused of enforcing a traditional style in keeping with its
ideology. The ICA or the Hayward Annual is just as acceptable to the state as the
Royal Academy’s summer show, because none of them makes any difference.
Once the arts become visible and works of art become public events in this way, they
also become commodities. Leo Castelli’s dealing in Pop Art may be understood by
comparing it with anyone’s dealing in a new product: he surmounted the same
problems of production, advertising, sales, taxation and so on. There is no reason to
think that the pleasure of his dealing with the paintings excluded aesthetic
satisfaction. The fact that the products then entered the system of exhibitions, reviews,
gossip, sales, colour reproduction and celebrity, arises without further ado from the
general culture of commodities.
Of course, this isn’t a recent development; it would be naive to think that the motives
of the 18th-century Grub Street were purer than those to be discovered in the galleries
of Madison Avenue. There is no point in warming ourselves with a pastoral vision,
based upon nostalgia for agricultural communities and the charm of a wheelwright
engaged in his craft. But the modern situation has two characteristics which are
particularly important to the technique of management. The first is that the product
can hardly be said to exist till a name has been found for it. To call it ‘art’ is, merely
to start the process. And the second is that the quality of the work of art is, in practical
terms, a secondary issue.
I’ve referred to Pop Art. Before it got its name, certain paintings were invisible in the
sense that those who looked at them couldn’t see them as anything in particular, or,
more to the point, as any class of thing more specific than the large class of being
paintings. The name made the paintings visible by making them discussable: you
could talk about them without standing in front of one. The same applies to every
school or movement in the arts. In 1952, when Harold Rosenberg wrote an essay
called ‘The American Action Painters’, he achieved several aims at the same time. He
brought certain paintings together. He clarified, even for the artists themselves, what
they were doing, and why. He surrounded those paintings with a discourse so
congenial to them that it has been impossible, ever since, to separate them from his

3

programme. It’s still a question whether the discourse arose from the paintings, or
went beyond them in a direction they merely indicated. But, in any case, the discourse
set the terms in which the paintings continue to be seen: ‘the canvas is an arena in
which to act’; ‘what was to go on the canvas was not a picture but an event’; action
painting ‘offers its hand to pantomime and dance’; ‘action painting is painting in the
medium of difficulties’. These are the terms in which the paintings are seen. Now, it
would be wrong to say that Rosenberg not only made them visible but told people
what to think about them. He permitted people to think of them by giving them the
words by which they could discuss them. The name ‘Action Painting’ is like a table of
contents, it indicates the terms of the discussion to follow.
It could be argued in a cynical spirit that Rosenberg’s naming of Action Painting,
useful as it was, was itself a managerial act; that it moved certain paintings into the
auction rooms and stuck a label on them, increasing their price without altering their
value. Now, that’s true, but what I admire in his essay is the delicacy with which he
took care not to imply that the paintings were fully explained by the name or
exhausted by the description he provided. The word ‘action’ made the paintings seem
serious—which they are—and the fact that the concept of action is virtually
inexhaustible in modern philosophy, made a space for them in relation to a continuing
argument.
But there is a problem in such lucidity. The phrases which have been devised to make
the arts comprehensible are rarely innocent, they often make larger claims than the
works themselves justify. The callow notion that life is absurd has certainly been
promoted by the label ‘Absurdist Drama’ affixed to a few unremarkable plays. The
name ‘Minimal Art’ carries a suggestion of self-denial and asceticism not endorsed by
Tony Smith and his colleagues in the works themselves. The problem with such
phrases is that they don’t so much describe any particular paintings or sculptures as
the category they are supposed to inhabit: once the category is labelled, further
paintings and sculptures are done to exemplify it, as if to order. The procedure differs
from the one that produced old names for literary and artistic genres: sonnet, epic,
novel, fresco. These names are neutral; they have never dictated how a new work
should go. An epic would have to deal with large events in a narrative spirit of some
splendour. A sonnet would probably be a love poem. But neither of these genres binds
the poet to an attitude: his love poem may be affectionate or bitter. But an Absurdist
play is written as such, as if it were partly written in advance. The existence of a
category invites an artist to exemplify it or to exacerbate it; either way, he
compromises himself. In turn, a new Absurdist play becomes marketable on the
precedent of other plays in the same category, so long as the interest in it holds. When
the category is sufficiently recognised, it can be alluded to, and imitated for mundane
purposes. So we have Mondrian-type wallpapers and sweaters, Picasso-type tiles,
Pollock-type linoleum, Absurdist jokes.
Stanley Cavell has noted another aspect of management. Such phrases as Action
Painting, Pop Art, Absurdist Drama, and Body Art not only make possible a new
response, but join in creating it: even when the response has been elicited, the phrases
are still required so that it may be maintained. Often, he says, it’s hard to know
whether the interest is sustained primarily by the work of art or by what can be said
about it. The words are no longer tested by how useful they are. In this way, criticism
will protect its art against criticism; presumably by confining the discussion to the

4

transaction between the category, Absurdist Drama, say; its exemplification in the
particular work, The Bald Prima Donna; and your recognition that this is what is
going on. The name makes sure that the work will be recognised not (or not
necessarily) for what it is, but for the category it fills; this recognition is perhaps as far
as one’s relation to the work is meant to go.
It’s rare to find a critical discrimination between one Action Painting and another. The
experience seems to begin and end with the recognition that the work is, in- deed, an
Action Painting. There is nothing to prevent critical discrimination from taking place.
The label is riot a veto. But the label gives the viewer, if anything, too much—it
pacifies him too soon. To see a poem or a picture as fulfilling a category is to reach a
premature sense of it. Naming or labelling is important because it is the most effective
means of making something familiar, and familiarity is necessary if the arts are to be
managed. The snag Is that the familiarity comes too soon, the label imposes local
clarity by ridding the work of its mystery and releasing the viewer from his hesitation.
But it’s hard to make this point without giving the impression that I want people to
remain hesitant or insecure forever. I want them to postpone their security. Most
cultural forces are working towards making the arts comfortably familiar. The
problem is how to break off the impression of familiarity in time to let the force of the
artistic vision come through.
T. W. Adorno has an essay which touches on this question. He is concerned with the
sociology of pop music, which he calls commercial music. He doesn’t bother to
distinguish its various kinds or levels. Commercial music, for Adorno, is music
‘intended for consumption’, it converts the listener into the consumer. Such music, he
argues, goes along with the reduction of people to silence, the dying out of speech as
expression, the inability to communicate in any genuine sense at all: ‘it inhabits the
pockets of silence that develop between people moulded by anxiety, work and
undemanding docility’. He would certainly regard Top of the Pops as a symptom of
an appalling illness at large. But Adorno’s most interesting point is that the question
of liking or disliking a piece of commercial music doesn’t really arise. If you try to
find out who likes a particular pop song, you find that liking and disliking are beside
the point or at least that no reasons can be given. ‘The familiarity of the music is a
surrogate for the quality ascribed to it: to like it is almost the same thing as to
recognise it.’ Now, I think this is still true. It is recognition which explains why, at a
pop concert, the loudest applause comes at the beginning rather than at the end of a
well- known song. People may of course be anticipating the pleasure they’re going to
get, but the further source of pleasure is the recognition that a famous song is to be
sung now by its famous singer. When Sinatra sings ‘My Way’ or when James Galway
starts playing ‘Annie’s Song’ the applause is warmer than anything earned in the
event by the performance. The audience wants Galway to play for them what he is
already famous for playing for others: to be present on such an occasion is the richest
gratification of the event.
Adorno assumes that familiarity in this sense is contemptible. Or rather, that when
liking and disliking have been replaced by spontaneities of recognition, capitalism and
commodity-culture have won yet again. I don’t agree. Not every experience calls for
critical judgment. If it did, none of us could meet the challenge. It’s good economy
that makes many of our actions automatic or habitual. Proust said that habit is a
second nature which keeps us in ignorance of our first and is free of its cruelties and

5

enchantments. If we had to think of walking instead of walking by habit, we would
exhaust ourselves by the proliferation of those efforts. Habit lets us reserve our energy
for the tasks that need it.
Adorno makes a more telling point when he argues that familiarity ousts the less
familiar work. The star system applies to work as much as to their performers.
Accepted classics undergo a process of selection that has little to do with quality.
Indeed, the situation is far more acute now than it was in 1938. Books are now sold on
the supermarket principle: they are given a certain shelf-time. If they are sold
immediately, they are ordered again; if not, they are removed, returned to the
warehouse or remaindered.
But a more difficult question arises from a consideration of the management of the
arts. Patronage, as the major force in socialising the arts, is incompatible with privacy;
it knows experience only as the experience of a group, the larger the better. Think of
the most famous instances of patronage in the past few years: the Tutankhamun
Exhibition at the British Museum, the Picasso in various places, including the
Museum of Modern Art in New York. These were vast public occasions, preceded by
immense publicity advertising each event as unique, which it was. Thousands of
people saw these exhibitions, but I doubt if any of them saw the paintings or the
Tutankhamun items in anything like satisfactory conditions. Queues were formed, the
crowds had to be controlled, people had to be moved through the gallery at a certain
speed. The major constituent of anyone’s experience must have been merely the sense
of taking part in a big public event with thousands of similarly organised people. No
one could have got more from the Picasso than a sense of his extraordinary energy: all
those paintings, all those styles. I found it impossible to look at any one painting with
the concentration it required. Perhaps the patrons didn’t want more—the event was a
public gesture, a seal of approval on an accredited culture. The horror of Picasso’s
paintings, as much as their power, was neutralised, made to comport itself for an
occasion essentially civic. Picasso’s ferocity didn’t stand a chance against the
embrace of a cherishing society.
The purpose of such patronage is to reconcile art to a cultural life which is presented
as lavish and comfortable. Society never offers to change itself or to take on any of
the attributes of art: the invitation always goes the other way. After all, the arts are not
necessary; you can keep body and soul together without them. But if they are not
necessary, society at least recognises that they are desirable and they can be made to
stand for luxuriousness otherwise unattainable. So they are brought into society as
glamorous objects, conspicuous proof that the society that contains them is
intrinsically fine. To present them in this way you have to give them a place in daily
life; by reporting their activities in newspapers; by employing critics. You can also go
in the same direction by attaching to the universities schools of theatre, the visual arts,
film, music and dance. This procedure accustoms the artist to a system which takes
naturally to courses, timetables, seminars, and so forth. It’s hard to retain a sense of
mystery of art when you have given the artist an office and called him a professor.
Five or six years ago, William Golding talked about being the author of Lord of the
Flies. He felt happy enough about it, but ironic about its official consequences. ‘For
better or worse,’ he said, ‘my work is now indissolubly wedded to the educational
world: I am the raw material of an academic light industry. The books that have been

6

written about my books have made a statue of me, fixed in one not very decorative
gesticulation, a po-faced - image too earnest to live with.’ Golding rightly insists that
he is not a statue but a moving target: he has other books to write, he is still changing.
He hasn’t said anything about Lord of the Flies in its character as a set text. He says
that the theme of the book is ‘grief, sheer grief, grief, grief, grief,’ and he leaves it to
us to wonder how much of that theme survives the incorporation of the book in an
educational system, the teaching of it and the learning of it for examination
requirements. After such knowledge, what forgiveness?
But the most serious effect of the management of the arts is that the criteria to be
enforced, if any are enforced at all, are managerial, not aesthetic. Since a bourgeois
liberal society doesn’t know what is true, it pretends to know it and settles rather for
what is effective. The question of what is true has become unspeakable, but an air of
seriousness can still be achieved by switching from truth to effectiveness. When that
word is used, it’s thought impertinent to ask what is the nature of the effect. The main
point about saying that someone is effective is that it praises the means without
reference to the end: it’s attached to images and gestures without saying anything
about the totality they serve.
What I have in mind as aesthetic criteria, as distinct from effectiveness of a
managerial kind, are at least suggested by a passage in Coleridge’s Biographia
Literaria, where he says that ‘our genuine admiration of a great poet is a continuous
undercurrent of feeling; it is everywhere present, but seldom anywhere as a separate
excitement’. That last phrase of Coleridge’s reminds me that a society that goes in for
diversity and interprets every change as if it manifested a profound spirit at work in
our service is likely to be content with separate excitements. Effectiveness may be
gained rather by local stimulations than by any continuity of purpose. I don’t believe
that the big exhibitions like the Japan Exhibition at the Royal Academy arise from
anyone’s decision that we should be alerted to a sense of the particular civilisation
involved. Each one of them could be replaced by another, with similar publicity,
souvenirs and charter flights and the intentions of the patrons would be equally well
served. It could just as well be Indonesia rather than Japan, Magritte rather than
Picasso, the Incas rather than Tutankhamun. The choice is arbitrary. The standard
argument about patronage, that it supports only what is safe, comfortably dead or
respectable may be true—but it’s beside the point. Patronage is now the practice of
management, and management is concerned with method. What is managed doesn’t
affect the quality of the management so the choice of one thing rather than another
isn’t crucial. The point is to show how effective its method can be.
So what can the artist do to mitigate the worst features of domestication? It opens up
some possibilities if his work is sufficiently unpleasant to fend off the warmest
excesses of good will; if it has the unpleasantness which T. S. Eliot ascribed to
Blake’s poetry as a mark of its greatness. Samuel Beckett, has said that art is the
apotheosis of solitude. He has also quoted Schopenhauer’s definition of the artistic
procedure as ‘the contemplation of the world independently of the principle of
reason’; and has noted that Dostoevsky ‘states his characters without explaining them
‘Now, Beckett has won all the prizes, but his work is such that it is hard to
domesticate: it is never far away from an un-civic grimace or an unassimilable
brooding over death. Society has, of course, taken possession of Beckett’s plays and
novels, but only up to the point at which their refusing power asserts itself, which is

7

quite early on. In the end, the techniques of management will kidnap any work of art.
However churlish the artist, bureaucracy will gather him into its embrace. But the end
can be postponed, and there is merit in postponing it.

8

