REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 3: The Parade of Ideas
TRANSMISSION: 24 November 1982 – Radio 4

We cultivate, these days, a merely spectacular relation to ideas and attitudes: we
watch them as they pass, as in a Lord Mayor’s parade. They hold our interest while
they stay in sight, but we’re not committed to any of them. The same predicament
arises in the reception of the arts. There’s no longer a discourse, an accepted frame of
reference and definition, which would enable us to know whether we agree or
disagree on a particular matter. The words we use in criticism are obviously
ideological and compromised, they are not neutral. Words which sound innocent, like
tone, form, action and scene are just, as argumentative as words like revolution,
history, praxis and dialectic. You know a critic by the words he uses, but knowing
him doesn’t mean that that you can easily talk to him. The words he uses enforce
judgments already made by others, so there is no moment at which you could begin a
conversation free of bias. The pluralist way of dealing with the built-in commitment
of words is to think of them all ironically, to engage in a play of mind which ranges
over them all with equal nonchalance. So we hear words like beauty and truth as if
they had inverted commas around them. But the play of mind doesn’t make available
even the possibility of a shared understanding of the object: it’s an act of power, not
of communication. All you can do with a play of mind is to watch its performance.
One of the peculiar things about the present situation is that, while the dialects of
criticism have become more than ever divisive, the arts as an institution have been
drawn into the general purposes of society. The first consequence is that democratic
habits of mind, such as the objection to privilege, have provided—for better and
worse—the conditions for the reception of the arts. For better, because recourse to the
arts is no longer quite the exotic matter it was. Music, literature, architecture and
sculpture in public spaces make aesthetic experience widely available. For worse,
because one of the vices of democracy is that it tolerates mediocrity, especially if, as
is the case now, mediocrity has a large following. We are capable of putting up with it
mainly because we try to ignore it. Any expression of disgust for kitsch is neutralised,
it’s deemed to be yet another mark of the unearned superiority of the political Right or
Left. Those who dissociate themselves from trash are nullified by being turned into
personalities: Malcolm Muggeridge, Kingsley Amis, William F. Buckley, John
Osborne. When John Osborne reviews a television show, nobody takes him seriously,
be is merely exhibiting his personality, and the readiness of such people to be turned
into personalities gives concern for standards several bad names: elitism, spleen,
vanity.
It’s a commonplace that people all over the world are tending to become the same,
even where there are apparent differences of race, creed and tradition. And it’s true, I
think, that power in our time is exercised mostly for the production of the same
images. The best that can be said for pluralism is that it doesn’t kill people or torture
them or even suppress them. After that, it lets people have the feeling of being

1

different on the silent understanding that they will gradually, in any case, conform to
the same. Nietzsche said that the motive of art is to be different, to be elsewhere.
Presumably he meant to be different not only from other people but from one’s
ordinary self.
It may appear that I am invoking a ‘spirit of the age’ without having established the
merit of doing so. Since Hegel, we have been encouraged to assume that the age has a
spirit, an inner mark or character which it utters in various ways. It’s hard to speak
about a time without giving it a character and a name and assuming that anything that
happens is necessarily related to everything that happens. Even if you think the
Nineties weren’t gay, or Hemingway’s generation wasn’t especially lost, or the
Sixties didn’t visibly swing, you have to accept these ideological words even to argue
against them. The same applies to W. H. Auden’s dismissal of the Thirties as ‘the
low, dishonest decade’. Sociologists posit a spirit of the age, and then set about
documenting it. It can then be endorsed by whatever supporting evidence the
sociologist produces. In theory, the procedure is harmless. The spirit of an age can be
regarded as the ghost in the machine that exercises power. But it becomes harmful as
soon as we imply that the ghost is privileged, and that it should or must be obeyed. At
that point, it becomes a secular version of God, a personified force which to be
obeyed has only to be recognised. In Poland, according to Czeslaw Milosz, ‘the
successes of Communism among the intellectuals were due mainly to their desire to
have value guaranteed, if not by God, at least by history.’
The harm has been severe in the past few years. It is widely believed that the only
thing you can do with the spirit of the age is obey it. Otherwise, you convict yourself
of being absent from your time and irrelevant to it. But 60 years ago, the Modernist
writers received as the spirit of the age only the force they set out to defeat. Instead f a
spirit of the time, officially defined in terms of the march of progress or liberalism or
whatever, they wanted to maintain the sense of real time personally or morally
charged. True time was kept. available by memory, as in Proust, and by a personal or
private sense of time, as in Bergson; by certain rarefied moments in Eliot’s poetry,
and certain historical moments, as in Pound’s Cantos. Some modern critics have
produced a political rhetoric so extreme that if the spirit of the age were as universal
as they allege, it would be futile to try to subvert it.
The conceit of a spirit of the age which must be obeyed is far more rampant in the
public arts, like architecture, than in the more intimate arts of painting and literature.
David Watkin has clarified the matter in his book, Morality and Architecture,
especially where he discusses, as rhetoricians of architecture, such men as Mies Van
der Rohe, Le Corbusier, and Sir Nikolaus Pevsner. These theorists agree in specifying
a spirit of the age as a collective wisdom working silently, at every moment, towards
its fulfilment. There is supposedly a logic of history which should not be resisted. If
this were really the case, it would become a moral duty to make it prevail; and indeed,
these theorists say precisely that. They play down the idea of tradition in favour of
such buoyancies as change, progress, development and revolution. Watkin has
pointed out that the rhetoric favours moral relativism ‘because of its belief that the
spirit has a totally new and homogeneous expression in each epoch, which thereby
renders obsolete the cultural, religious, moral and political patterns of previous
epochs’.

2

It may seem that there Is a contradiction between the politics of pluralism and a
sociology of the spirit of the age. But there Is no contradiction. The conceit of a spirit
of the age is quite compatible with pluralism, because it offers itself as the wisdom
which lies behind every event: it allows room for every attitude, subject to the
qualification that history, all the while, is moving towards its fulfilment.
Theorists of the Zeitgest leave the decision to history, but tell you in advance what the
decision will be. The politics of pluralism and the sociology of the Zeitgeist come
together in the high regard we have for change and development. Development is an
uplifting notion, it sounds positive, and it provides, as Eliot says in The Dry Salvages,
‘a means of disowning the past’: it also provides a promise of enhancement for which
nobody needs to work, since history is already supposed to be moving towards higher
and higher forms of achievement. We identify the good with the future, we make our
desires compatible with destiny. If we don’t want to exercise judgment, we have the
sanction of pluralism for not doing so.
It’s a consolation, these days, to be able to .identify our motives with the logic of
history, because in other respects the social sciences are making gloomy reports. What
anthropology mostly offers is remorse. Western societies have allegedly imposed
upon primitive people entirely Western ways of language, religion, law and politics.
Levi-Strauss and other anthropologists have interpreted as sinister and domineering
every intrusion upon primitive peace. Guilt is the only sentiment we can decently feel,
and where anthropology has discovered that we are predatory, psychology has
discovered that we are fractured. If anthropology and psychology were right, we
should thank the god of history for releasing us from the chore of coming to acts of
judgment at all.
It follows from the politics of pluralism that the idea of a unified audience has
collapsed. The major Modernist writers concerned themselves with an audience in
ways which are no longer available. Yeats and Eliot knew that the question of an
audience, in any unified sense, was already acute. Yeats hoped against hope that he
might still appeal to a coherent audience by calling it a race and naming the race as
Irish. But then he had to admit that the only Irish people he could tolerate were the
peasants and a few aristocrats. So he imagined that the relation between peasants and
aristocrats, like the relation between Lady Gregory and her tenants, might be strong
enough to suppress the middle class, the small shopkeepers ‘fumbling in a greasy till’.
Eliot, who agreed with Yeats in little else, agreed with him in despising the middle
class. Like other modern writers, he couldn’t make up his mind whether he wanted to
be read by the few readers likely to understand him, or by an ignorant audience which
he identified as the lower class.
In his essay on Marie Lloyd, he said that the middle class was morally corrupt, and he
praised the working class for maintaining a kind of life that could still be expressed in
a popular art. ‘The working man,’ he said, ‘who went to the music hall and saw Marie
Lloyd and joined in the chorus was himself performing part of the act; he was
engaged in that collaboration of the audience with the artist which is necessary in art
and most obviously in dramatic art.’ But Eliot’s sense of such a collaboration is as
archaic as Yeats’s. Ken Dodd and Billy Connolly don’t address a working-class
culture; they are parts of a culture defined by middle-class television rather than by

3

the factory or the mine. The pleasure they give their audiences is that of showing that
the social system is liberal enough to include them.
Instead of a unified audience, there are hundreds of audiences, groups of people
linked by miscellaneous interests. The reason why a distinction between high culture
and popular culture is of little use today is that people live by bringing together a
collection of disparate images. Some images are held in common by millions of
people, but each of us in turn diversifies our lives by assembling further images,
according to procedures of selection impossible to characterise as high or popular. If
three hundred million people watch the Eurovision Song Contest it’s mainly for the
sense of being one of such a vast number of people looking at the same images for a
couple of hours; it can’t be with any expectation of hearing songs worth hearing.
Television is much concerned with the production of similar images. While it
apparently offers a wide choice, the images tend to be the same, like blue-jeans.
Marshall McLuhan’s description of the global village provided by television is true to
this extent, that television appeases the common desire to be the same as everybody
else. Or at least to have, for a while, the sentiment of being the same. The
simultaneous desire to be different is harder to satisfy, but it is satisfied in smaller and
more disparate groups. A cynic might say that the assemblage of images is purely
random, and that discrimination isn’t involved. But it’s more probable that there are
several forces at work: caprice, perhaps lethargy, choice, topicality and various other
things. In effect, people make their lives as if they were compiling an anthology.
Certain items have to be included, or it’s not representative enough to be an
anthology; but when these items are included, there is space for more informal
choices which are thought to be charming, if they’re not too many or too bizarre. If
you live in a city, the range of choice is pretty wide.
Sometimes, images are chosen with a high degree of discrimination; sometimes, the
members are drawn together by the operation of taste, which makes things acceptable.
The main characteristic of taste, by extension from its dealing with food and drink, is
that it acts immediately without waiting for reasons: it bears the same relation to
judgment that an instinct for self-preservation bears to the human body. The
difference between discrimination and taste is not that one has reasons and the other
hasn’t—they both have reasons—it is that one gives reasons and the other doesn’t.
In the past few years, the politics of pluralism have begun to affect the teaching of
literature and the arts in the universities. The traditional view has been that a poem is
to be read with such intimacy, concentration and understanding that the reading issues
in an interpretation; the aim of which is to bring forward the life of the poem, to
produce it in the way that a director in the theatre takes a text and. gives it life.
Teachers presumed to show their students how to do this. Some interpretations were
better than others; if a particular reading were wide of the mark, it could be shown to
be mistaken. But in the past few years, the assumption that one interpretation is more
valuable than another has been questioned. The most reasonable form of the question
may be found in Frank Kermode’s The Classic, especially where he points out that a
classic, far from insisting upon one reading, is patient of many different ones. Othello
lives in the different interpretations that readers and theatre directors have offered of
it. Kermode’s attitude is quite reasonable. But it has been taken to wild extremes by

4

those who insist that what matters is each person’s experience of the work of art, and
that the question of right and wrong doesn’t arise. Anything goes.
Pluralism in teaching arose in the Sixties, when students started resenting the official
superiority of their teachers. If you were teaching a course in advanced mathematics,
you had no challenge of this kind. But if you were teaching a standard course in
English or American literature, you could expect the claim that every Jack is as good
as his master. Stanley Fish and other teachers found it convenient to concede to the
claim, and to convince their students by the power of their practice. If Fish gave a
remarkably convincing interpretation of one of Milton’s poems, he could afford to let
every student have his own interpretation, if he wanted it. Over the years, some
teachers have pushed the political issue farther, arguing that schools, colleges and
universities are in league with a domineering society. The authority of a teacher is
sometimes compared to that of a judge or a policeman. Some of the challenge is
directed at the teacher, some at the authority of what is taught. The idea of a canon in
literature and the arts is questioned. In many colleges and universities, the authority of
a canon has broken down; the books to be read are chiefly of symptomatic or
sociological interest, and they are read mainly for their bearing upon some social
theme, such as violence, sexuality, prejudice or whatever. It’s one of the victories of
the social sciences that, for certain university courses, a television show like
M*A*S*H is more relevant than King Lear.
It would be wrong to suppose that these matters are mere aberrations to be found in
spineless institutions of education. Even in Modernist art and literature, there has long
been an antipathy to the exercise of will. André Breton’s programme for Surrealism
involved not only chance and automatism as aesthetic procedures but a cult of
passivity, the suspension of the will. The repudiation of will, as if it could be nothing
but the will-to-power, has never been far from modern art; the sentiment became more
general in the 1960s, especially in America where the will was-widely associated with
Richard Nixon and American foreign policy. The cult of Oriental postures in
philosophy was based upon the idea of releasing oneself from a bad world of politics
and power. Stanley Cavell has pointed out that in some modern composers; chance is
invoked as a principle in much the same way as earlier composers invoked the Muse,
to claim that the work of art comes not from the composer but through him. He is the
instrument of the Muse; the authority of the work is not his. The difference is that
‘speaking for the Muse was to give voice to what all men share, or all would hear;
speaking through chance forgoes a voice altogether.—there is nothing to say.’ But it
isn’t really content that is hated, rather the will to deliver it.
Jackson Pollock was fully capable of composing a picture, but his drip paintings, such
as his Cockatoo, are suppressions of the will, leaving everything to chance. The fact
that leaving everything to chance is itself an act of will breaks the logic but leaves, the
paint. The artist presents himself as the medium, not of a privileged truth, but of
whatever happens. And he also exhibits that dissatisfaction with the official
conventions of meaning, message and content which has long been an element in
modern art. John Cage’s 4’33”, in which a pianist sits at a piano, in silence, and raises
his hands three times during that period to indicate the end of a movement, is not
4’33” of silence: it’s a gesture by which Cage provokes the audience to listen to the
casual noises which silence includes, as a more liberal alternative to the formal

5

sequences of an expected music. ‘My favourite music,’ Cage has said, ‘is the one we
hear all the time if we are quiet.’
But he has something more in mind. What he repudiates is what I think we have to
retain, the convention by which we think of life as a matter of survival, and think of
the wilt as our best means of surviving. Cage often quotes Meister Eckhart’s saying
that ‘we are made perfect by what happens to us rather than by what we do’. Cage
repudiates not only the will as a Darwinian insistence on survival but the particular
rhythms which he associates with the exercise of wilt: assertion and denial, crescendo
and diminuendo, tension and resolution, which are so much a part of traditional
music. ‘Boredom dropped when we dropped our interest in climaxes,’ he has
reported. Instead, he would give equal attention to everything.
This sentiment explains the antagonism aroused by critics who try to discriminate.
Think of the gratification most people feel when such a critic has been proved wrong;
the French salon-keepers—the critics who rejected the first Impressionist paintings;
Nietzsche, Tchaikovsky, Hugo Wolf, and Shaw in their denunciations of Brahms;
Walton, who has dismissed Mahler; Ernest Newman, ridiculing Bartok’s Violin
Sonata. We say that such critics are dogmatic, but we are irritated not by the dogma
but by the will exercised in its pronouncement.
Our standard reaction is: who does he think he is? But the real reason for discouraging
dogma in the criticism of the arts isn’t distaste for elitism but the fact that it puts a
stop to conversation. Take, for instance, F. R. Leavis’s dismissal of Sterne in his study
of the English novel, The Great Tradition, where he refers to Sterne’s ‘irresponsible
(and nasty) trifling’. Beyond that phrase, in which even the word ‘and’ sounds
dogmatic, the case against Sterne is not made. What is offensive in the phrase is that
Leavis refuses even to discuss the matter: he refuses, by more than implication, the
company of anyone who would want to.
Lionel Trilling offered to discuss it, while first accepting the strong emphasis that
Leavis put upon the importance of ‘marked moral intensity’; just as Trilling accepted
that ‘it is upon the degree and quality of moral intensity that all aesthetic
considerations of the novel depend’. But he argued that Leavis didn’t take any proper
account of ‘the art that delights— and enlightens—by the intentional relaxation of
moral awareness, by its invitation to us to contemplate the mere excess of irrelevant
life’. Clearly, there is the making of a genuine argument in Trilling’s response; but
Leavis didn’t deign to notice that an offer to debate the question had even been made.
If such a situation occurred in the sciences, if a scientist didn’t even consider taking
up a colleague’s rival argument, it would be regarded as disgraceful. But in the arts
there is no convention by which the decencies of debate are observed.
The matter of debate becomes much more tendentious where boundaries of expertise
are crossed. Would an art critic take up an argument started by someone who is not by
profession an art critic? I’m thinking of such things as Foucault’s essay on the Las
Meninas of Velazquez; Gilles Deleuzes’s book on Francis Bacon’s paintings; Julia
Kristeva’s essay on Giotto’s frescos for the Arena Chapel in Padua. I doubt if any of
these has been given a place in the professional study of its subject. It may be, of
course, that the habit of pluralism has entered so fully into criticism of the arts that a
critical debate rarely arises. Let anyone say whatever he wants to say, subject to the

6

reservation that nothing said will be taken seriously enough to be questioned. But
there may be a more acceptable explanation. None of the essays I have mentioned is a
disinterested account of its subject: each is for the sake of something else, an
argument on a larger theme for which the essay on a painter is merely an illustration.
The larger theme is not an aesthetic question: it’s sometimes philosophical but more
often political. Indeed, one of the clearest marks of contemporary criticism of the arts
is that, when it entails judgments, the judgments are political rather than aesthetic.
There is a well-known essay by Roland Barthes called ‘The Grain of the Voice’.
Primarily, it’s about the singer Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, whose singing Barthes
didn’t like. He acknowledged his talent, but he remained hostile to his style. Barthes
maintained that Fischer-Dieskau’s singing is perfect, but that it is a perfection that
answers the demands of an average culture. The culture is petit-bourgeois, it wants its
music to be expressive, to trans. late ‘emotion’ into communicative forms. In FischerDieskau’s singing the diction is dramatic, the pauses, the checkings and releases of
breath occur like shudders of passion. His art is totally devoted to the soul, as distinct
from the body; to the breath, separated from the muscles, the stubborn weight; it’s
devoted to expression as distinct from significance. The breath in such singing is felt
as the soul’s swelling or breaking; it’s a mystical art, denying the body in its
aspiration toward purity. ‘With Fischer-Dieskau,’ Barthes says, ‘I seem only to hear
the lungs, never the tongue, the glottis, the teeth, the mucous membrane, the nose.’
And he contrasts him with Pauzera, a singer we don’t know very well because he sang
before the age of the LP. ‘You never heard him breathe,’ Barthes’ says, ‘but only
dividing up the phrase.’ Not the breath of lungs, but the letters, the syllables of a
language. Barthes disapproves of any art that merely makes itself available to gratify
its culture. According to this view, Fischer-Dieskau is flattering petit-bourgeois
society by offering it an image of its own perfection, of the sense of itself as perfect.
He allows his own talent to coincide with the particular kind of perfection a petitbourgeois culture dreams of. Panzera’s art, apparently, set itself aslant its culture. For
the same reason, Barthes prefers Landowska to other harpsichordists and Lipatti to
other pianists: their playing is never flattened into perfection, they don’t add an
intention to the music or fuss over its every detail, contrary to petit-bourgeois art
which, according to Barthes, is ‘always indiscreet’.
Barthes’s essay on Fischer-Dieskau depends upon politics rather than aesthetics. He
has no time for a perception that doesn’t take sides. Where Trilling argued that ‘it is
upon the degree and quality of moral intensity that all aesthetic considerations of the
novel depend,’ Barthes argued that every aesthetic merit depends upon an
interrogative, and ultimately subversive, relation between the art and its society. There
should always be a certain recalcitrance. The trouble with Barthes’s position was that
it had conditions attached: he had a particular idea of society in view and, indeed, a
particular axe to grind. He merely answered one ideology with a manifesto for
another. But art is not just hostile to our particular form of society; it is neither leftwing nor rightwing. It’s antagonistic not to reality, but to any and every official
knowledge of it. This antagonism should be maintained, whether the official
determination of society is bourgeois liberal, Marxist, aristocratic or Fascist. That’s
why aesthetics must never degenerate into politics or psychology. Both are reductive
and play into the hands of a society which likes nothing better than to reduce the arts
to the forms of knowledge it already enforces.

7

