REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 2: The Domestication of Outrage
TRANSMISSION: 17 November 1982 – Radio 4

It’s hard, these days, to feel outrage. When the Argentinean army took possession of
South Georgia and the Falkland Islands, many people felt that it was outrageous, but I
think, too, that they were consoled to discover that they could still feel this emotion.
Mary Whitehouse has made a public life for herself by specialising in outrage; not so
much by collecting instances of the outrageous as by alerting herself to the sense of it,
keeping it going when it would otherwise have lapsed; as it has lapsed in most people.
The plain fact is that bourgeois society can accommodate nearly anything. I should
say incidentally that I use the word ‘bourgeois’ as a neutral term and often a term of
praise, though one is supposed to use it nowadays only for irony or contempt. To me,
a bourgeois liberal is one who bases his liberalism upon a commitment to the values
of a family man, anxious to secure a decent future for his children. A bourgeois
society approves these values and regards the occasions on which they are defeated as
regrettable. A bourgeois criticism of art likes to report that images which seem wild or
bizarre are not really different from the ordinary images with which we are familiar.
Such criticism likes to take part in ‘the rapid domestication of the outrageous’ which
Leo Steinberg has named as the most typical feature of contemporary artistic life.
The artistic attempts made from time to time to outrage people are hapless. We
wouldn’t expect much from nine-minute wonders, like Mary Kelly’s display of used
nappy-liners or Victor Burgin’s stapled photographs. But more consequential artists
find it hard to stir the sense of the appalling. Diane Arbus’s photographs may have
been taken to remind people that thousands of lives are broken, thousands of bodies
crippled, that there are people who seem to have no life but the horror of it. But when
you look through a book of Arbus’s photographs, you feel that what they make is a
freak-show. The feeling is a temporary aberration from normality which reinforces
our sense of what is normal, like the experience most people will have had on seeing
The Elephant Man.
The most telling consequence of the domestication of outrage is that,, far from
disturbing the security of ordinary things, it confirms it. You can make an interesting
photograph of anything, however commonplace. Long before Pop Art, photography
broke down the distinction between the features of art and the features of ordinary
life: for that reason, it was a long time before it was taken seriously as anything more
than a device for recalling large occasions. The difference between photography and
the older tradition of the still life in painting is that photography, being technological,
found it easy to deal with machine-made shapes. The camera turned everything,
natural or manufactured, into an image, and asked you to look hard at the result. But a
photograph of a car is not a car; just as there is a difference between a car and the
word ‘car’. The mysteriousness of art is in all art, not merely in the art of the avantgarde; it suffuses the space between the image and its reference. The difference
between a great painting and the materials from which it is made is finally mysterious;

1

‘finally’ in the sense that much can be said about the painting before reaching the
point at which you have to leave it to silence. But mystery is not a secret message
which the critic, in principle, could discover. There are many things to be said about
Brancusi’s sculpture Endless Column, for instance, but nothing useful can be said
about it on the assumption that it has a meaning it could be persuaded to disclose, or
that any such meaning would exhaust it.
What remains hidden is the presence of the work, the force of its presence as distinct
from the particular bits of bronze or marble or whatever it’s made of. There are works
of art which are present to us in something like the way in which a person may be
present to us. When you love someone you don’t assess their qualities, you
acknowledge them without thinking of reasons or thinking that any reason would
matter. So it’s entirely proper to speak of loving a work of art since we extend the
word from our use of it in personal life. Or at least that’s a way of recognising and
celebrating what I have called its presence. The reason that modern critics are
embarrassed by the mysteriousness of art is that it threatens the purity of their secular
status. My evidence for this isn’t particular critics but the techniques they use, the
confidence they place in their sentences. They insist upon the assurance that nothing
escapes their consciousness. If they sense that the work of art is indeed occult, they
get away from it as quickly as possible. They keep going till they reach the artist. This
displacement of interest from the work of art to the artist is nearly incorrigible.
John Berger has pointed out that the artist is no longer valued as the producer of his
work, but instead for the quality of his vision and imagination as expressed in it. No
longer primarily a maker of art, he is ‘an example of a man, and it is his art which
exemplifies him’. Now, that’s true, even though the work of art may command a high
price in the auction room. If an artist is admired or cherished, it is for what he is, an
instance of a certain kind of person. But he’s also valued because he enables us to feel
that we are in touch with art by seeing the artist. The resentment against mystery is
mostly against its absolute difference from ourselves. It’s difficult to say anything
about Hans Ulrich Lehmann’s Duets for Three Players, it is an unwelcoming work, so
the critic goes off to Lehmann himself, who turns out to be, at least so far as
appearance is evidence, a man like any other. He can be a little different but not very
different. What is unusual appears only in his music and not in the image we see of
him.
Once on the safe ground of the artist, the critic uses any of a number of available
terminologies of explanation. One of the most popular at the moment is
psychoanalysis. Writers such as Freud, Melanie Klein, and Lacan have provided an
official vocabulary, a relatively easy set of categories, quite limited in number, at least
one of which the artist may be expected to fulfil. In a recent exploit, a critic proposed
to explain Henry James’s work on the basis of his having been passionately in love
with his brother William. James’s biographer, Leon Edel, was so taken with this
notion that he undertook to read James’s entire fiction again in this light: his
implication was that the new reading would be far more profound than the old one. In
fact, there is no objection to the application of psychoanalytic concepts to a work of
art except that the exercise seems doomed to be reductive. The psychology of the
artist now seeks to know him not as a special case but as an unusually clear
manifestation of the ordinary. The artist is now deemed to be unusual only because he
provides more evidence than other people. To be fair, any established terminology is

2

bound to reduce its object; that is its purpose, to make sense of an obscurity by
bringing to bear upon it the sense that has already been made in another way.
Psychoanalysis is a dialect, a choice of privileged concepts within a language - it has
the character of diction in poetry, a set of favourite words which are brought together
for mutual support. But the trouble with the psychoanalytical interpretation of art is
that it interprets not art but the artist: in that sense it’s bound to evade the question of
mystery or otherness.
Adrian Stokes, for instance, following Melanie Klein’s theory about the way in which
a young child’s mind is formed, thought of the subject-matter of art as dominated by
two experiences that have been internalised: the feeling of oneness with the mother’s
breast and therefore with the world; and secondly, the recognition of a separation
between the child and the world, originally the mother’s whole person, whose loss
was mourned. For Stokes, the artistic motive is the need to restore the lost loved
object. He then distinguishes two forms of this motive: first, ‘a very strong
identification with the object whereby a barrier between self and not-self is undone’;
and second, ‘a commerce with a self-sufficient and independent object at arm’s
length’.
Now Stokes’s theory is useful. His distinction between the two forms of the artistic
motive could be applied, for instance, to the experience of looking at a painting. First
we try to break down the barrier between us. At a later stage we may draw back from
it and try to judge it; and to do this we have to take the painting as an independent
object at arm’s length. But the trouble with Stokes’s theory, when he applies it to
particular works of art and architecture, is that the works are called upon merely to
confirm the theory. If you took the theory as strictly as Stokes took it, you might still
know a lot about art but you would have only one way of knowing it. And you would
be so rigorous in confirming the same few axioms that you might fail to see the
differences between one work of art and another. His discourse makes certain
perceptions possible, but it’s also restrictive; it prevents you from perceiving what lies
beyond it or to one side of it.
The work of art is the artist’s way of dealing with compulsions which he treated
otherwise when he was a child, by turning to the breast. The compulsions themselves
are unconscious, but the theory accounts for them by telling a plausible story. And
because a story takes place in time, it brings into time and rationality factors which
otherwise would have little chance of getting there. Critics who want to escape from
the mysteriousness of the work try to replace it by the intention they ascribe to the
artist. A few years ago, Robert Klein argued that it is no longer possible to judge a
painting or sculpture without knowing who made it and in what spirit. When we look
at a contemporary painting in a gallery, we search for the artist’s name and the title of
the painting, if it has one. We do this not out of mere helplessness or curiosity but in
the hope of seeing the work as the fulfilment of an intention. If we know the artist, we
may happen to know his general line: if so, all the better. What Klein meant, I think,
was that the work of art now persists chiefly as an indication of an intention; it is as an
embodied intention that it can best be studied. We are led, then, straight from the
work to the psychology of the artist and from there to the economics of the market. To
be blunt about it: it pays to deliver certain recognisable objects and intentions. We
find it comforting to be in the presence of intentions we understand because the

3

considerations of psychology and economics aren’t at all mysterious—discussion of
them is easy.
The question sometimes arises whether the work exceeds the intention or merely
documents it. You’ll recall the incident, a few years ago, when the Tate Gallery paid
good domestic cash for a work called Equivalent VIII, a load of bricks laid on the
floor by the artist Carl Andre. Andre’s intention was far more interesting than the
bricks or the order in which he assembled them. He explained it in a conversation, a
few months ago, with Edward Lucie-Smith. Referring to Turner’s way with colour, he
said that Turner had severed colour from depiction and then manipulated it in a
condition of freedom. ‘I sever matter from depiction,’ he said, ‘I am the Turner of
matter’. He meant that in choosing bricks, metal plates, or bales of hay, he chooses
things that are associated with particular uses, and he diverts them from those uses so
that he can give them intrinsic existence. Andre’s intention is to assert that art is a
system of pleasure, based chiefly upon our physical presence in a material world. It’s
like the theory of literature put forward by the Russian critic Boris Shklovsky that the
function of literature is to free things of their familiarity so that we can really perceive
them, looking at them as if they were strange.
Normally we look at things mainly for their use; we deal with them as we deal with
the wallpaper in our rooms, we would notice it only if it was gone, torn or daubed
with black paint. Carl Andre wants much the same result. Looking at his bricks, we
see them as such, as objects: the artist has forced us to pay attention. He doesn’t claim
that there is anything sacred in the bricks themselves, or even in his way of disposing
them. Andre regards the artistic event as a combination of the artist’s intention and
our way of receiving it. Is there anything against this? No, except that art in this sense
can have no history other than that of its intention. Once we have taken the point and
resolved to amend our lives accordingly, there is nothing more to do. Like any one of
Andy Warhol’s films, it is not necessary to see it, it’s enough to understand that it is
there, and why. In that respect, unfortunately, the comparison with Turner doesn’t
hold.
Up to this point the displacement of attention from the work of art to the artistic life
sounds innocent. If the work sits there, retaining its mystery, returning our stare, why
shouldn’t we turn aside to consult the artist, who is more likely to answer whatever
questions a common discourse allows us to ask? Can’t we go back to the work at any
time and renew our sense of its occult power? Yes, but in practice one interest has
displaced the other, precisely because an interest in the artist is easily satisfied. And
there is a further consideration. Increasingly, the form in which we pay attention to
anything is a result of the way in which we watch images on television. We pay
attention to most things now as if they were television programmes. Now, television
is restless with any object which asks to be looked at slowly and patiently. The span
of willing attention to an image on television is a matter of seconds, not minutes.
Then a new image must be given. When such programmes as Omnibus and The South
Bank Show present an artist, they run away from his works and concentrate on him, an
easier subject because he is responsive, mobile, unsecretive. Instead of a work of art
to be looked at, the camera gives us a man or woman, much like anybody else, so we
are not affronted by seeing anything strikingly different from ourselves. Objects,
when presented at all, are turned into happenings. A recent South Bank Show about
Sir William Walton said nothing about the character or the principles of his music, but

4

plenty about the kind of man he is. It may be that people who watched the programme
have been so stimulated by the personal lore it provided that they have gone straight
to his music. I can’t be certain, but I very much doubt it. And even if it were true, it
still wouldn’t have provoked the right sort of attention, because they would receive
the music as further illustration of a personal image.
In T. S. Eliot’s The Elder Statesman, Lord Claverton discovers that he’s been freed, at
last, ‘from the self that pretends to be someone’. ‘And in becoming no one,’ he finds,
‘I begin to live.’ He begins to live, and to live in a social world, because he has given
up all pretence: his privacy is not a secret self behind his disclosed appearances. But
TV has got people into the habit of assuming that what is there begins and ends with
what they see.
The same process takes over the presentation of art. Hence the fact that the most
famous artists in our time are famous as personalities rather than as makers of their
works. This doesn’t mean that, like Bianca Jagger, they are famous for being famous.
They are artists, they have made things— pictures, films, songs. But the images they
offer to the public gaze are more compelling than the works they have made. Think of
Salvador Dali. Most people recall a crucifixion, liquefied watches, popular
reproductions in the postcard-shops. But Dali’s form of existence before the world has
made him a personality far more visible than his paintings. Allen Ginsberg became a
symbol even for people who couldn’t name one of his poems. Andy Warhol is far
more famous as a personality than as a painter or a film director; he exists as a
gesture, a snapshot from the album of the Sixties. His fame persists not because it
corresponds to any new work he has done but because many people now approaching
middle age feel nostalgic towards the decade in which they felt that they were making
history. Warhol reminds them of that sentiment. It’s not necessary that he should ever
take up a paintbrush again.
This disproportion between the artist and his work—the fact that with the connivance
of the media, a little work goes a long way to sustain a personality—marks a reversal
of the traditional relation between the two. It was long thought a sign of success in an
artist that he disappeared into his work, leaving no merely personal residue. Henry
James thought that this made it extremely difficult to write a novel about a successful
artist; there was not enough left over, everything had gone into the work. ‘Any
presentation of the artist in triumph,’ he said, ‘must be flat in proportion, as it really
sticks to its subject—it can only smuggle in relief and variety. For, to put the matter in
an image, all we then—in his triumph —see of the charm-compeller is the back he
turns to us as he bends over his work.’ James felt that the good fortune of an artist
would be to remain anonymous, visible in his works and not otherwise; and that his
being also a person should be a matter of his privacy and his reserve.
But we have now reached a situation in which privacy and reserve can be converted to
visible purpose. The fact that Philip Larkin doesn’t appear on television and rarely
gives readings of his poetry has added to his fame. His invisibility has become a
nuance of visibility. A recent South Bank Show on Larkin turned his absence into an
esoteric form of presence.
The urgency with which critics run from the work of art to the artist is only partly
explained by the fact that the work remains mysterious and the artist doesn't. There is

5

also undisguised revulsion against the sacred object, the original work of art.
Photography is a comfortable medium because even if you see photographs which are
also works of art, you're not browbeaten by their sublimity; such works are
‘extraordinary examples of the ordinary’ rather than works of genius like King Lear,
which no one in his senses could dream that he might write. But the unique work of
art is intimidating. Think of the depression of spending more than an hour in an art
gallery. The aura that surrounds a masterpiece is the sign of its uniqueness, it attends
our sense that there is only one of it and that any likeness is only a replica. This
consideration gives the unique work its prestige, and not only in Sotheby's; but it is
also the focus of a vague resentment.
Few of us would really want to own a masterpiece; it would be out of place in our
homes. We are happier with decent colour-reproductions, because they don’t
intimidate, we don’t feel oppressed by them. Lithographs are acceptable because there
is no original, they are all equal.
There is also a political explanation for this, asserted most vigorously by Marxist
critics. Walter Benjamin has observed that history is always recited in favour of those
who have won; the point of view of the defeated is never recorded. ‘As in all previous
history,’ he says, ‘whoever emerges as victor still participates in that triumph in which
today’s rulers march over the prostrate bodies of their victims. As is customary, the
spoils are borne aloft in that triumphal parade. These are generally called the cultural
heritage. There has never been a document of culture which was not at one and the
same time a document of barbarism.’ Benjamin’s argument shouldn’t make you feel
guilty when you go to a gallery or a museum. For one thing, if the victors in a
particular society were workers rather than princes, there is no reason to think that
their triumph would be achieved and maintained without victims. A triumphal parade
would still take place. One has only to attend a ‘first night’ in the West End or at
Lincoln Centre to feel that the event, whatever its artistic occasion is also a
celebration of victory. The happy few are on display to themselves and to one another.
One has the same misgiving on going to see the Kennedy Centre for the Performing
Arts in Washington. The building has transformed cultural life in that city, but it
stands as an architectural assertion of the imperial motives that built it. Domination is
inscribed in its marble. Richard Hoggart has recently asserted, following the
conventional wisdom on such matters, that there is ‘an almost total loss of confidence
in the very idea of a higher culture to which one could and should aspire.’ I would
want to put it differently. Certainly the idea of accredited values, known and accepted
as such, whether an individual aspires to them or not, has broken down. The idea of
aspiration, in anything but a careerist sense, has lapsed. But the Sydney Opera House,
the new Barbican, and Kennedy Centre are still making assertions in favour of
cultural life, even if the assertions come from an equivocal mixture of power, national
pride and a commitment to continuity. The loss of confidence has occurred not in the
decisiveness with which these buildings are built but in knowing what should be
produced in them, once they are built. What is desperately confused is the relation
between cultural life and its components: the break in the circuit of attention between
the work of art, the artist, the critic and the common reader or listener or viewer is
only one sign of that confusion.

6

It may seem that the drift or the flight from the work of art to the artist is refuted by at
least one contemporary form of criticism. Structuralists and post-Structuralists
maintain that the notion of the author as the creator of his works is merely a modern
consolation prize; it goes along with the prestige a bourgeois society ascribes to the
individual. Roland Barthes and other critics regard as mere superstition any attempt to
find the depth of the work in the psyche of the author. Instead, they replace the author
by language itself, which is then studied as an impersonal system, a system that
doesn’t need a per. son to work it. The idea is that language allows for a personal
intervention in the moment of writing or speaking, but the person ceases with the
enunciation: nothing in language corresponds to the identity of a person or to his
apparent continuity from one moment to the next. The author is at best a secretary, a
scribe.
But the Structuralist thesis doesn’t attribute any mystery to language as a system of
signs. A critic who is interested in modern literature is not supposed to deal with it as
acts of the creative imagination m the medium of a particular language. He is
supposed to find that the work of art is a mere function of a compromised language,
corrupted because it has been used in the exercise of power and on behalf of an
ideology. The job of criticism is to document the extent to which the modern
languages have been corrupted. In turn, Structuralist readers are urged to adopt an
ironic or sceptical attitude towards whatever they read; they are to know that it is
poisoned. Barthes, in his later work, showed how such readers might behave
themselves. They should cultivate caprice and excess, going against the grain of the
writing, distrusting its rhetorical figures, reading at their own speed. In this way they
retain some measure of freedom, and break the conspiracy between author, publisher
and the economy of the market which has produced the book as a commodity for sale.
It begins to appear that in Structuralism and post-Structuralism we are returned to
something like the avant-garde position in relation to a society deemed to be
bourgeois through and through. No wonder critics who start with these assumptions
about the impersonality of language tend to lose interest in criticism and to become
writers, as if to fill the avant-garde position left vacant by novelists and poets.
I often wish the Structuralists were right. It would be pleasant to give up the sense of
mystery in the arts and to think that everything in the work could be explained in
systematic terms. The French critics want to get rid of mystery because it sounds like
theology or divinity. But I am not persuaded. The idea of a language as a system
explains everything in a work of literature except what we most have to acknowledge:
on that, the idea is helpless. It’s at this point, and against the Structuralists, that we
have to reinstate the artist. Indeed, it’s extraordinary that it should be necessary to say
that he is the one who has made the work. What do we gain by saying that T. S.
Eliot’s Gerontion is a work of language, or even of the English language, and that
Eliot is merely its scribe? The point about a scribe is that someone else could do his
work. To refuse to call the writing of Gerontion a creative act performed with the
collaboration of the English language is nonsense. The fact that the English language
is a communal creation, the work of its speakers over many centuries, is not at all
incompatible with the creative imagination we ascribe to Eliot in this instance. A
linguistic system makes certain things possible, but it makes nothing actual. Nothing
could ever be done if it were left to a system to do it.

7

8

