REITH LECTURES 1982: The Arts without Mystery
Denis Donoghue
Lecture 1: The Zealots of Explanation
TRANSMISSION: 10 November 1982 – Radio 4

The painter Jasper Johns once remarked: ‘I can imagine a society without any art at
all, and it is not a bad society.’ I wonder what he meant. That the ways of art are
intolerably oblique and that for much of the time we want to live directly, we want to
act as If immediacy were possible, in violence, revolution or anarchy? Or that art gets
in the way of other things, perhaps higher causes? It’s entirely possible not only to
relegate art to a secondary position but to think that art may be a nuisance. Johns may
not have had anything very specific in mind: he may just have been appalled, for the
moment, by the difficulty of art, or by the arbitrariness of the whole activity. He may
just have meant that it would be splendid if art weren’t a separate thing, to be
cultivated by those who are interested in it.
Wouldn’t it be better if the artistic impulse were fulfilled rather than humiliated in the
ordinary run of daily life; if our social arrangements were to take into account not
only justice but beauty? The philosopher John Dewey once imagined a time when ‘the
collective life that was manifested in war, worship and the forum knew no division
between what was characteristic of these places and operations, and the arts that
brought colour, grace and dignity into them’. According to such a vision, the arts
didn’t exist as separate interests, the spoils of power, money and leisure, but as
enhancements, indistinguishable from the ordinary life they adorned. But I hope Johns
meant something different—that he would prefer art not to exist at all than that it
should exist as a commodity among commodities, its mystery removed. I want to talk
about the arts in relation to the mystery that surrounds them, not as a problem to be
cleared up but as the very condition in which they appear at all. In that sense, mystery
is to be acknowledged, not resolved or dispelled.
It has become a scandal to speak of mystery. Many people regard talk of it as sheer
mystification, a pretentious claim upon profundity, as if the only situation worth
talking about defeated every reasonable attempt to deal with it. But I want to reinstate
mystery and to distinguish it from mere bewilderment or mystification. One of the
strongest motives in modern life is to explain everything and preferably to explain it
away. The typical mark of modern critics is that they are zealots of explanation; they
want to deny to the arts their mystery, and to degrade mystery into a succession of
problems. But the effort is perverse.
The philosopher Gabriel Marcel has distinguished a mystery from a problem in this
way. ‘A problem,’ he says, ‘is something which bars my passage. It is before me in its
entirety. A mystery is something in which I find myself caught up, and whose essence
is therefore not to be before me in its entirety. It is a proper character of problems to
be reduced to detail: mystery, on the other hand, is something which cannot be
reduced to detail.’ When we refer, for instance, to the mystery of ‘Being’, we don’t
mean that it is something that comes to our attention as an obscurity, so that we can

regard the obscurity as the first stage of clarification—as if at a later stage the issue
would become clear or at worst clearer. If ‘Being’ is a mystery, it is a mystery through
and through, not a difficulty to be cleared up.
If we want to take the mystery out of life, it’s because mystery is thought of as an
insult to our intelligence; that the part we play in it is merely one of bewilderment. A
character in Yeats’s play The Resurrection says: ‘What if there is always something
that lies outside knowledge, outside order? What if the irrational return? The gist of
the matter is: a problem is something to be solved; a mystery is something to be
witnessed and attested. By admitting this distinction I don’t have to take a vow of
silence and confess that on the arts there is nothing to be said. There is much to be
said, short of an explanation. I’m not required to drive discussion of the arts into
gorgeous or demonic nonsense.
The removal of mystery from the arts is one of the ways in which our society tries to
tame the occult and its offence. In all the stories which have been interpreted as
bearing upon the presence of the artist in the world, there is a recurring pattern, a
motif of strangeness. Prometheus stole fire from the gods and gave it to man, knowing
that man needed it for some phase of his development and that the gods would not
want to see him developed in that way. In another story the god Heracles gave
Philoctetes a bow which was uncannily accurate; it never failed to hit the mark. One
day Philoctetes was bitten by a snake. The wound suppurated, and it became so
loathsome in its smell that Philoctetes’ companions removed him to the island of
Lemnos and sailed off to Troy without him. He remained banished for ten years; the
wound hadn’t healed. But it was revealed to the Greeks that they would never defeat
the Trojans without Philoctetes and his bow. So they brought him back, he defeated
Paris in single combat, and Troy was taken.
The story tells of the artist in a world which is alien to him. His gift is uncanny and
perhaps for that reason it seems loathsome till it is needed: It tells a truth people don’t
want to hear. In the story, the people realise at last that they need this truth, and they
are ready to put up with the foul smell to have it. There, I suppose, the allegory breaks
down for us. Modern society doesn’t look to art for its salvation, or even for its
wisdom. A poem, a novel or a painting is never what a society thinks it needs. Indeed,
the relation between a society and the arts is never one of need, though it is sometimes
one of enhancement or national pride. It’s only in retrospect that a work of art may be
seen to have defined the society that provoked it. Sometimes it’s the only remaining
evidence that the society it emerged from even existed, and the only justification for
anyone’s continuing interest in it. All of these stories speak of need and compulsion,
of going beyond the limit. The artistic vision is in some way ineffable, unspeakable; it
deflects every attempt to pin it down by knowledge or to define it in speech. The
stories say that art is not to be assimilated to the comfortable ways of a society. The
artist is an eagle, not a dove.
In the Preface to The Tragic Muse Henry James said that the relation between art and
society is one of conflict, and that the conflict is ‘one of the half-dozen great primary
motives’, presumably because it touches upon many other motives once you let It
spread. It’s surprising, at first glance, that James thought it such a great theme; it
could be regarded, on a damp morning, as a minor problem, a bother to a mere
handful of people. But it’s easy to think of the artist as representing not only his

colleagues in the arts but anyone who feels, on good evidence or bad that they are
homeless in the world in which they live. There’s a passage in Italo Svevo’s
Confessions of Zeno where Zeno asserts ‘that it is perfectly possible for someone to be
conscious of possessing a very lofty Intellect even though that consciousness is the
only proof he has of it’. It’s equally possible for someone to be conscious of
possessing an acute artistic gift on the same meagre evidence: the sentiment, given
life by the desire for it, is all one needs. So James’s theme speaks to anyone who feels
their talents for whatever reason unemployed, and who believes them to be
extraordinary. He didn’t say whether the conflict between art and society is good or
bad for art. My own understanding is that we receive the arts most completely not
when we pay lip-service to them but when the relation between art and society is
mostly one of conflict and suspicion, if not one of hostility.
In The Tragic Muse James presents the conflict as one between art and politics, or
rather between the diverse claims exerted by each. As a nuance, he assigns both
motives to one character, Nick Dormer. There is a scene in which Nick wanders
through the National Gallery in London, looking at paintings by Titian, Rubens,
Gainsborough, and Rembrandt. His interests are divided by a desire to become a
painter and a dé6ire, which he understands as a duty, to go into politics. When his
mind recoils from politics, it is because he thinks the vocation crude, it doesn’t allow
for shades and niceties of feeling. When it recoils from art, it’s because art seems
useless. When he talks about-art, he sounds rather like Jasper Johns. ‘These great
works of art,’ he thinks, are ‘a poor business, only well enough in their small way.
Their place was inferior and their connection with the life of man casual and slight.’
The worst you could say about politics at least was that it was ‘a clumsy system for
applying and propagating the idea’; the idea Nick has in mind is progress, the
advancement of social and public life.
But why should there be antagonism between politics and art? Isn’t there room for
both? The trouble is that both politics and art are universalist in their ambition, each
claims a total vision of life. More emphatically, artists have resented the claim that
politics knows what reality is, and that this knowledge is fully represented in political
institutions. Of course there is more than one way to engage with society. Like
Dickens and Arnold, you can move freely, sometimes charming society, sometimes
shaming it out of its complacency. Or, like Henry James, you could enjoy its social
amenity while keeping your soul and your art intact, analysing the obscure relations of
personal and social manners. More generally, the artist could take up an ironic or
subversive attitude towards social convention. A motto for this gesture is Kenneth
Burke’s: ‘When in Rome, do as the Greeks.’
But on the whole, serious artists in the past hundred years or so have assumed that it is
morally disreputable for them to identify their values with those of middle- class
society. There is in fact much to be said for bourgeois society even when we insist on
degrading it by calling it bourgeois, but artists have rarely wanted to say any of it.
One of the aims of modern art and literature has been to escape from the middle class
and what Ezra Pound called its ‘accelerated grimace’. So the arts have appealed to
pleasure rather than duty, interrogation rather than conformity; they thrive upon
suspicion rather than consensus, the creative speech of poetry rather than the
stereotypes of daily life. We would be surprised to read a good poem about urban
clearance or the EEC. The artist tries to make a space for himself, if necessary a

‘world elsewhere’, rather than submit to the anonymity, the crowdedness, a mass
society would force upon him. In avant-garde art, these gestures of dissociation have
sometimes been maintained to the point at which many people can see nothing in
them but spiritual terrorism, like the fractured face in a Picasso portrait. In extreme
cases, the gesture amounts to a rage for the absolute, as if nothing could satisfy so
long as it remains finite. So we have the demonic aspect of art, which is sometimes
true mystery and sometimes its false face, mere mystification.
The 19th-century artist kept his soul, as far as possible, by withholding assent to
official purposes. As the price to be paid for that spiritual privilege, his art emphasised
difference rather than continuity of experience; a certain purity of form, only to be
achieved by transcending the ordinary world. There is always a risk of weightlessness
in his images or in his voice, a suggestion of falsetto. He achieves form as a desperate
choice, and we sense everything that has had to be kept out of the picture to make it
become what it is. There is also the artist’s particular form of vanity, the assumption
that he is free of ideology, he is the exemplary manifestation of purity of heart. At an
extreme point the artist feels the need to constitute art as a separate reality, with the
implication that this is the true thing. Daily life is then represented as false, enforced
by a society that finds lies more profitable than truth.
It has been common to see the artist as he has often seen himself, a man apart,
doomed to bear his vision in an alien world. There are many ways of reaching this
idea. One of them is by holding a concept of the imagination as a special power or
attribute. Some people have argued that imagination is much the same as perception,
that the only difference is one of degree. But others maintain that imagination is the
special capacity to posit something as not being real, and to take hold of such images
in the composition of a work of art.
A man of imagination is not debarred from being also a man of perception, but if we
regard the imagination as a distinctive power, creative and visionary, we set the artist
apart and ascribe a peculiar destiny to him. He would not necessarily be better than
other people: in the qualities which depend upon perception and memory, he might be
worse. He might be ruthless, dishonest, immoral. He might exaggerate the scale of his
gift, and think it justified incidental acts of turpitude. But in any case he would think
of himself as different from other people. Dylan Thomas, John Berry- man, Robert
Lowell, Brendan Behari, Mark Rothko, seem to have insisted on fulfilling the image
of the doomed artist, as if their gift were a fatal wound. It’s true that many people ruin
themselves who are not artists; but no one offers their not being artists as a reason for
their having killed themselves. The image of the doomed artist has retained its power
because of the association of the artist with transgression, genius, the role of
scapegoat, the sacrificial victim. We don’t know what to make of this image. On the
whole, we try to include the artist in the forms of our knowledge, but if he rejects our
embrace we know that in some profound sense he is right, he knows he is not really
one of us. Art does not confirm the reality we normally think we know and possess. In
fact art is permanently antagonistic to our sense of reality because it makes a space for
those images which our sense of reality excludes.
On the whole, critics of the arts aligned themselves with artists in repudiating the
common middle-class world. Sometimes the critic saw himself as a mediator between
an estranged artist and the common world from which he had withdrawn; often by

showing that the artist’s difficulty is not wanton or pretentious. Or the critic
strengthened the artist’s resolve, offering him the support of a sympathetic audience.
Or he tried to place beside the work of art not a translation of its form but a set of
meditations companionable to the work. The critic assumed that his true work was
discrimination, the act of judgment and valuation. Criticism begins with the sensory
experience of someone engaged with a work of art, but it is not complete until the
analysis of sensation has been brought, in T. S. Eliot’s phrase, ‘to the point of
principle and definition’. That phrase implies critical discrimination, because only in
discrimination is the question of principle fully present and the question of definition
adequately challenged. It’s up to the reader to take the poem or the novel in that spirit.
When an art is changing, with new forms competing for space with older forms; when
nothing like orthodoxy prevails— then the critic has to question his own relation to
the art, and come to an understanding of it. He can’t rely on an inherited relation.
When F. R. Leavis wrote New Bearings in English Poetry in 1932, the major works in
modern poetry were already there, but they were not in place, their mutual relations
were not understood. Leavis’s presentation of modern poetry essentially in terms of
Hopkins, Eliot and Pound was a work of critical discrimination.
The problem now is that the relation between the arts and society has changed in ways
which make many of these traditional critical enterprises redundant. There has been a
change in the way artists see themselves, and the way in which society acknowledges
them. The antagonism I mentioned between bourgeois and bohemian, duty and
pleasure, constraint and freedom has been dissolved. Serious artists don’t think of
themselves as avant-garde, on the subversive margin of society, driven there by
capitalism and the corruption of the market. The division of society into middle- class
liberals and the rest has lost its meaning. In the West it’s only, in theory, in university
lecture-halls and ICA debates, that an alternative to liberalism is even mooted, and
then it’s mooted by people, of the Left and the Right, who wouldn’t think of giving up
the satisfactions of middle- class life. In certain post-Marxist theories bourgeois
liberalism is supposed to have ended, but in practice it survives. Indeed, it’s
impossible to point to a country in which a revolution of the Left or Right has
produced, in practice, social and personal values different from those of ordinary
bourgeois societies. It’s still possible to maintain a sense of divided interests within
middle-class life; by accepting its mixture of satisfactions and irritations with
reservations in one degree or another. We can devise ‘techniques of trouble’ to
maintain a sense of scruple. Philosophers can undermine knowledge and regard it as
mere self-delusion. But these troubles are largely self-induced; they are scruples
arising from refinements of luxury, so they don’t add up to anything more than a
theoretical revolution, an apocalyptic seminar. Fortunately, they die of their own
excess. Who talks any longer about ‘the impossibility of communication’, a problem
we thought so incorrigible, a few years ago, that we mistook it for our fate?
Thirty or 40 years ago it was commonly assumed that there were higher values than
those administered by our official institutions; government, law, the market, the
banks. It was supposed that religion, education and the arts had a special concern for
the higher values. The morality of the arts was to bring forward what the official
institutions chose to forget; intimate subjective experience. The arts took up that
experience and made it their main business. The poet John Crowe Ransom argued that
the function of a genuine society is to instruct its members how to transform the

values of instinct and appetite into aesthetic values; and he associated aesthetic values
with those of religious conviction. He thought that societies might be persuaded to
rise above their ordinary selves by observing the rituals of religion and art. In a
different account R. P. Blackmur said that the purpose of literature, as of all intellect,
creative or critical, is to remind the powers that be, simple and corrupt as they are, of
the forces they have to control. Ransom reminded our institutions of what is beyond
their offices, though still within the reach of a leap of spirit. Blackmur reminded them
of what is beneath them, unacknowledged, the old mole in the cellar. But in both these
versions, the arts are assumed to be privileged; they know more by way of rituals and
traditions than anyone knows in his mere individuality.
It’s rare, these days, to hear the arts proclaimed in this way. No one dares to hope that
middle-class society would be transformed, persuaded beyond its ordinary self, by
observing the rituals of art. It’s still possible to find critics who want to shame middleclass society out of its conventions and to undermine its power; mostly by presenting
as sinister the same values which society presents elsewhere as laws of nature. But the
writings of these critics move with significant speed into purely theoretical issues.
Only when there is a real belligerence between official and unofficial values is a
worthwhile art possible, and middle-class society has discovered how to achieve its
victory by pretending that nobody has been defeated. Especially since the turmoil of
1968, societies have learnt that they can deal with dissent by incorporating it.
Orthodoxy can be expanded to accommodate heresy, and when the fuss dies down, it
can contract again to its norm.
The soft answer turneth away wrath, especially if it is accompanied by grants,
fellowships and other felicities. The universities discovered that they could take
Modernism off the streets by offering courses on its favourite texts.
In their turn, artists have come to terms with industrial capitalism, and some of them
are even willing to enjoy it. The art critic Harold Rosenberg has maintained that the
change came with Pop Art, which demonstrated that art doesn’t need esoteric images
or sanctified motifs, it can deal happily enough with standard domestic objects. ‘Since
the advent of Pop Art,’ he says, ‘no influential American art movement has been
either overtly or tacitly hostile to the “majority culture “. Today, both the alienation of
the artist and the antagonism of public opinion to art have been successfully
liquidated.’ In any case there has been a truce and I suspect that hostility has been
replaced by indifference. People have to ignore so much, these days, of what they see
and hear that the outrageous doings of an artist are easy to deal with.
In 1877 John Ruskin disliked the Whistler Nocturne he saw at the Grosvenor Gallery
and referred to ‘the cockney impudence by which a coxcomb could ask 200 guineas
for flinging a pot of paint in the public’s face’. I doubt if anyone today, even an art
critic, would bother to lose his temper, or throw it away, no matter what paintings he
saw. If you don’t like a painting, you walk away. There is still a certain edginess in
the public response to highbrow music:
a little of it goes a long way in concert programmes, if a general audience is expected
to attend. But on other fronts the war is over. You can hardly play an electric guitar
and maintain an aesthetic objection to technology. Besides, artists have discovered
that there are constructive possibilities in the new mechanisms: electronic music, tape,
digital recordings, video, inter- media of many kinds, The reception of the arts is now

technological through and through; Zeffirelli’s production of La Bohème on
television, Brideshead Revisited as the book of the television series.
The end of the war has made a difficulty icr criucs: tney no longer know.what they are
supposed to be doing. So long as the artist was in conflict with respectable society, the
critic’s job was clear. But now he finds that the artist has made a separate peace with
society.. There is no further need of a mediator or a supporter. So a few critics have
taken up the avant-garde function on their own authority; they have. declared
themselves independent, and have moved into philosophy. But most critics have
remained uncomfortably on the margin of the arts, spending their time not in criticism
but in description.
But in fact there is much work to be done in a discriminating way, or in a diagnostic
way, especially where the work of art seems to proclaim itself mysterious. At the end
of Peter Shaffer’s play Amadeus, for instance, the central character Salieri, who is
about to cut his throat, addresses the audience. He tells them that they are, like
himself, failures, mediocrities:
I was born a pair of ears and nothing else. It is only through hearing music that I know
God exists. Only through writing music that I could worship. All around me men seek
liberty for Mankind. I sought only slavery for myself. To be owned— ordered—
exhausted by an Absolute. This was denied me, and with it all meaning.
Nothing in the play up to this point has justified a claim upon the Absolute. Salieri’s
motives, as they have been presented, are petty enough to be understood without
recourse to divinity or divination. The scene is not mystery but mystification; it is
spurious in the grandeur it claims, just as spurious as the thrill a middle-class audience
is expected to feel when they are denounced as fellow mediocrities by a man with,a
razor in his hand, about to demonstrate that he is unmediocre enough to cut his throat.
Shaffer is trying to give his Salieri a force of radiance which nothing shown in the
play warrants. Mystification is his recourse to false altitude, which in a dim light
looks like the real thing: The sublimity is specious, as specious as the comforting
implication, throughout Amadeus, that art is the modern substitute for religion.
There isn’t much point in having the arts at all unless we have them with all their
interrogative power. They are not cosy or ornamental. Critics have collaborated in
making them seem cosy, assuring us that they won’t hurt a bit. If the arts don’t hurt,
why have them? It’s only modern vanity which supposes that everything can be
known or that only what is knowable has a claim upon our interest. The artist and the
priest know that there are mysteries beyond anything that can be done with words,
sounds or forms. If we want to live without this sense of mystery, we can of course,
but we should be very suspicious of the feeling that everything coheres and that the
arts, like everything else, fit comfortably into our lives.

