REITH LECTURES 1983: Government and the Governed
Douglas Wass
Lecture 6: Participation - The Sole Bond
TRANSMISSION: 14 December 1983 – Radio 4

When Aristotle stated that man is by nature a political animal, he was not only
seeking to distinguish humanity from the lower animals: he was asserting the
importance of the state — or, as we might say, government — in the human
condition. And when in Book Three of The Politics he examines what elements go to
determine the nature of being a citizen, he explicitly identifies ‘participation in giving
judgment’. This concept of participation in government is one which ran through a
great deal of Athenian political thought and action. The Greek city state, the polis,
was small enough to permit all free men to share in the taking of political decisions,
and it was an important duty laid upon the citizen to accept the responsibility that this
entailed. Representative government, as we know it today, would have been a
peculiar, indeed a questionable idea. Of course, offices of state existed in Athens and
their holders had a measure of delegated discretion, but they were often filled by lot
and were, in any case, subject to a degree of popular oversight in their daily actions
which governments today would find hard to stomach.
The size alone of the modern state rules out the Athenian model as one we should try
to copy, even if we wanted to. Debate can only be organised in an assembly of a few
hundred people and decisions must be entrusted to an even smaller number. And a
good thing too, say some. Government, they argue, is a complex and subtle process,
which can be understood and operated only by a small elite; the bulk of the citizens in
any society are too preoccupied with their daily problems to want to engage in regular
political debate and decision-taking, except perhaps at the local level; why force them
to consider affairs of state? Better by far allow them to elect representatives to do
their political thinking for them.
This is not a foolish idea, and it has forceful apologists. They hold that government by
a small number of people, answerable periodically for their performance when they
seek re-election, is more likely to be efficient and wise than government which is
perpetually subject to mass popular pressures. Public opinion, they tell us, can never
be well-informed or enlightened. It is readily swayed by demagogues and can too
easily be led to demand action which is inimical to its own long-term interests. By
contrast, the accountable representative has both the time and the inclination to follow
and participate in the debate and come to wise and informed conclusions. Despotism
is avoided by the obligation laid on him to account periodically for his stewardship,
and by the freedom of others to compete for his office.
As a model for democracy I find this seriously deficient. The participation in
government it offers to the mass of the populace is minimal. The choice of
representative is no substitute for the choice of policy. Conceded such a limited role
in determining public issues, ordinary people - as we have seen - have taken the
course of bypassing representative government. They have associated themselves with

1

people of similar interests into trade unions, pressure groups and lobbies. They have
sought to influence government decisions not primarily by the process of influencing
their representatives, but by applying pressure at the very point where policy is made,
in executive government. The evolution of pluralist organisations has had its
counterpart in the machinery of central government. Departments ‘mark’ pressure
groups and special interests. Even Parliament has now organised itself, through its
Select Committees, in this way. As a result, political decisions at every level of
government are reached with a view, in part at least, to satisfying these pressure
groups and interests. Whether they satisfy the requirements and aspirations of the rest
of us is a question all too rarely asked. The pressure group, in fact, is often quite
unrepresentative of the people as a whole. The costs of deferring to it are rarely
evaluated in terms of the impact on the entire community. It is much easier politically
for governments to come to terms with some special interest than to oppose it. Those
who suffer from the compact are often unorganised, and their protests — if they are
ever articulated go unheard.
I do not want to deny all value to pressure groups. In a pluralist society they provide
like- minded people in association with a means of bringing more influence to bear on
political decisions than they otherwise could. They constitute an additional route
through which executive government can be brought to account for and be made to
defend its policies. In that sense they may be conducive to more open government, to
the development of more public debate and to the promotion of public awareness of
live political issues. Whatever one thinks of the methods and objectives of the
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, no one can deny that it has performed a public
service in focusing opinion on one of the most crucial political issues of the 20th
century.
But if the political influence of pressure groups is to be kept in check, it can only be
done by more, not less, popular involvement in decision-taking. There is ample
evidence that the public want this. The Kilbrandon Commission on the Constitution
found widespread evidence of dissatisfaction with the accessibility of the political
system and of a desire for more responsiveness from it. Nor is this a new thought.
John Stuart Mill put the point precisely when he argued that the best kind of
responsible government is one ‘in which public participation is as great as the general
degree of improvement of the community will allow. . . . Nothing less can be
ultimately desirable than the admission of all to a share in the sovereign power of the
state.’ The challenge today is to make the representative political process more
publicly acceptable. And the key lies in seeking to re-establish the Greek ideal in
concept if not in precise form.
It has been one of my central concerns in these lectures to address myself to the task
of making government decision-taking efficient. Efficiency is certainly one important
criterion for securing public approval of government. But efficiency is not of itself —
even if widely interpreted — the only criterion for popular support. A general feeling
that government is sensitive and indeed responsive to the public’s hopes and desires is
an even more critical element in any democracy.
It is partly in recognition of this that governments have done so much in recent years
to promote a dialogue between the government and the governed. They consult much
more widely than they used to before taking firm decisions on policy. The open

2

consultative document upon which public comment is sought and which forms the
basis of a parliamentary Select Committee investigation has become a common
feature of the political scenery. Governments get a useful indication of popular
feeling, too, from market research surveys of public opinion. These are healthy
developments and I am sure they will be taken further. But they have their limitations
and they do not bring us much nearer to a participatory democracy. The extent to
which governments consult public opinion or seek public comment is still determined
by the government itself. And the value of one-off public opinion surveys — based as
they have to be on simple and sometimes slanted questionnaires — is not always
clear.
The difficulties of determining the popular will apply also to the holding of referenda
on issues of public interest, one of the techniques considered from time to time as a
means of popular participation, but applied nationwide in this country only once — on
the issue of our continued membership of the European Community. The advocates of
referenda view them either as a means of checking or promoting constitutional change
or of establishing public support for a policy which may be opposed by sectional and
influential interests. Although they are widely used in the United States where at the
local and state level the electorate is frequently invited to decide some public issue,
and in a more limited way in Europe too, they have not found favour here. The
Burkean doctrine of the right of the elected representative to decide issues on behalf
of his constituency is deeply entrenched. And our politicians are reluctant to surrender
this right. In any case, it is a rare political issue that can be presented to a mass
audience in a simple ‘either/or’ form. Some questions, like the one in 1975 on our
continued membership of the European Community, may lend themselves to such
treatment. But others, like the issue of capital punishment, do not. To establish a clear
view from the electorate of its position on this matter, it would be necessary to define
with some care the crimes for which capital punishment was being considered, what if any - degree of judicial discretion would be allowed, and so on.
In a parliamentary debate, all these aspects can be deployed at length and Parliament
can then reach a precise decision which can be turned into law. A public debate lacks
this precision and a public decision can at best be only a general one. Nor can there be
much confidence, as things stand, in the public’s decision being an informed one. If it
is to reach an enlightened view for or against capital punishment, the public should
have available a great deal of factual and analytical material. They should, for
instance, have statistics of the incidence of the crime, evidence about those who
commit it, facts about recidivism, evidence about deterrence, facts, too, about the
circumstances in which capital punishment is administered. But if capital punishment
is a difficult issue on which to poll public opinion, how much more complex is a
matter like, for instance, the level of National Insurance benefits. The question ‘Do
you think that the retirement pension for a married couple should be set at £55 or £60
or £70 a week?’ would produce one set of answers.
But if the question also spelt out the consequences of each level of benefit - if we
were told, for instance, what the insurance contributions for people in work would
have to be in each case - the answer would almost certainly be different. Without a
good deal of education and enlightenment, public opinion, polled in this way, could
well be a poor guide to policy - poor not in the sense that it would not correspond to
elite opinion, but poor in that it would be ill-informed and, in the long run,

3

unacceptable even to those expressing it. The perverse way in which voting takes
place on the various fiscal propositions put to the electorate by the State of California
is a sufficient illustration of this point. The binding referendum, therefore, cannot take
the place of a parliamentary decision on complicated public issues.
And this brings me to one of the most important aspects of our parliamentary system:
the contact between the sitting Member of Parliament and his constituents. How good
are our representatives at keeping their finger on the public pulse and could they do
more? Most of our Members have a good record on this, though the nature of the
system of consultation may give them a biased view. The extended length of our
parliamentary sessions compared with those of Continental assemblies and of the
United States Congress limits the time a Member can spend face to face with his
constituents. His weekends are taken up either with surgeries - that is to say sessions
at which he hears their grievances, usually of a rather personal kind - or at meetings
with his party supporters. Both of these groups, the aggrieved and the partisan, are
unrepresentative of the constituency as a whole, and their voices may give a distorted
impression of what public opinion in the round really wants.
I used, for a while, to have meetings with one Minister I worked for each Monday
morning. He would come back from his constituency with the views and opinions he
had picked up there over the weekend. They nearly always consisted of approval of
what the government was doing. Yet I knew from national opinion surveys that the
government was not enjoying support for the particular action we were taking. The
Minister was simply being told what it was supposed he wanted to hear. I see no easy
solution to this problem. Each MP must, I think, take whatever steps he sees open to
him to determine the preferences of his constituents as a whole.
The media, of course, have a major part to play in giving voice to public opinion, but
their function is more that of opinion-former than opinion-seeker. They offer a
platform to advocates and opponents of particular policies and they provide the route
through which the public acquire the information they need to reach a conclusion. But
what that conclusion is too often remains obscure. Public opinion will perhaps always
be amorphous and indeterminate, except on the greatest and simplest issues of policy.
To attempt to systematise a definition and a crystallisation of public opinion may be
doomed to failure because of the sheer size of the public and the complexity of most
issues.
But if we cannot hope to get more definition and more decision from the public,
should we be complacent about the level of public debate and the quality of
information to which the public have access? After all, the fact that public opinion
may be difficult to measure and assess does not mean that it is unimportant. And if
public opinion is important, it is surely important that it is enlightened.
In last week’s lecture I talked about the duty of government to make available to the
public the factual and analytical material it assembles in the course of formulating
policy. This is an important element of public education. But the government is not
the sole or even the primary source of much information and analysis. It would be a
sorry thing for democracy if it ever came to depend exclusively on government for
information. Fortunately, there is little danger of this happening here. Our press and
other media have a high standard of professional reporting. We are also endowed as a

4

country, though less so than the United States, with a number of bodies which seek to
promote public understanding of policy issues. These bodies, largely financed from
private funds, carry out extensive research into economic, sociological and strategic
matters — research which is renowned for its rigour, independence and impartiality.
And the contribution they make to the democratic process — and for that matter to the
policy-making process — is considerable. But their findings and the conclusions of
the discussion they promote do not always percolate to the public at large; nor do they
always make the impact that they should when they reach the policy-makers’ desks.
The present generation of civil servants, if not that of their predecessors, is aware of
the value of empirical research and evidence as a basis for policy-making, and it
makes regular use of the research institutes. But there are some politicians of a more
ideological cast of mind who are unenthusiastic. Facts can be uncomfortable
bedfellows alongside dogmatic conviction.
If there is one medium outside government which has, in the course of our history,
succeeded in making an impact on both public opinion and on policy-makers, it is the
Royal Commission. Other countries have, of course, their own investigating
mechanisms, but the Royal Commission here and elsewhere in the Commonwealth is
almost unique. It combines authority and prestige with thoroughness of approach: the
authority comes from the high status of its members, the thoroughness from its
command of resources and the co-operation it receives from the public. Royal
Commissions have played a substantial part in shaping our history for nearly 1,000
years. They have contributed greatly to the enrichment of public understanding of
political issues, particularly when the public conscience was exercised. The spread of
issues which Royal Commissions have studied extends from the maintenance of
lighthouses to the reform of criminal procedure, from the secondary school system to
the slaughtering of horses. Though they usually have power to make
recommendations, these are not binding on the government of the day. But a decision
to set aside a Royal Commission recommendation is politically awkward, not just
because it is embarrassing to reject the considered advice of a prestigious body (and
one that the government itself may have appointed), but because the interests which
support the Commission’s conclusions can be relied on to make maximum political
capital out of a rejection. And even in cases where governments have not accepted
Royal Commission recommendations, the expository work which the Commissions
carry out and publish performs a valuable role in educating opinion. Above all, the
work of Royal Commissions gets noticed by the press and by the public generally.
The same work carried out unofficially or informally does not attract comparable
attention. Even minority reports — as Mr Selwyn Lloyd found on the Beveridge
Committee on Broadcasting, when he alone came out in favour of commercial
television — can have powerful effects on the development of opinion.
Not everyone in the past has shared my admiration for Royal Commissions. The 18thcentury jurist Blackstone was very critical of their use, and A. P. Herbert, in a
typically amusing satire, argued that the appointment of a Royal Commission was
evidence of a failure to govern. But perhaps he only meant that the government was
sharing power? Royal Commissions, and even their less prestigious cousins the
Departmental Committees, are used fairly sparingly by governments — on average
one Commission and about 20 Committees a year. The motives for setting one up are
often confused. The subject-matter may be complex and controversial, like industrial

5

relations; it may be new, like cable television; it may be a subject which calls for a
good deal of fact-finding; or it may be one where the government feels reluctant to
make a move without securing a measure of independent support. Sometimes, alas,
the Royal Commission is a device for putting a difficult subject on the back burner.
Establishing one, therefore, is a fairly haphazard and arbitrary matter. It would be
difficult to detect any system or coherence in the pattern of their appointment.
An important feature of the Royal Commission is that its creation lies in the hands of
the government and no one else. The members, too, are selected by the government.
The terms of reference are written by the government. Whitehall invariably spends a
good deal of effort defining the remit of an external body, to make quite sure it will
not trespass on territory which it does not want explored.
If we ask ourselves why the government should control the establishment,
composition and remit of Commissions, the only valid answer is that as things stand
there is no one else except possibly Parliament to do it. And even if Parliament were
the authority for recommending Royal Commissions, the government — through the
control it exercises over the House of Commons — would still be in the driving- seat.
In any case, the House of Commons shows a much greater disposition to carry out
investigations itself through the Select Committee machinery rather than appoint nonparliamentarians to do the same job. So, if the system is to continue in its present
form, it is probably only the government who can decide.
But leaving to the government decisions to establish Commissions and to determine
what they should investigate has many drawbacks and deprives the public debate of
much potential material. I can think of many subjects which would merit
dispassionate and authoritative investigation, free from party and sectional prejudice.
The political supervision of the police, the relevance of our social security system to
the problems of poverty and incentive, the financing of higher education — all these
come to mind as possibilities. Many of them, of course, are under review by the Select
Committees. But, as I have already argued in these lectures, the Select Committee, by
virtue of its partisan composition and its concern with the short term, does not
function at all like a Royal Commission. And even the most enthusiastic upholder of
parliamentary sovereignty would find it hard to class a Select Committee report with
that of a Royal Commission.
Is there, then, an alternative which would cut the link between the Royal Commission
and the government and create exciting new opportunities for independent and
statesmanlike investigation of issues of public importance? I believe there is. Instead
of the individual ad hoc Royal Commission appointed to do a specific job, there
would be a single, large, permanent Royal Commission from which panels would be
drawn to carry out specific studies. It would be the Commission itself, not the
government, which decided what issues to investigate, what terms of reference to give
its panels and who should sit on them. Though the panels would normally be drawn
from the Commission itself, suitable non-members could be co-opted for individual
studies. But decisions on co-option would be for the Commission alone. Membership
of the Commission would be for a fixed period and would follow appointment by the
Crown on the advice of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister would be expected to
give advice, not in a partisan or government-biased way. He should be guided by a
spectrum of interests and he would be morally bound to take due account in his

6

recommendation to the Crown of nominations made by certain non- government
bodies. If, as I would argue, the size of the Commission were thought of in terms of
200 or so persons, its composition could take in the professions, commerce, industry
and banking, education, social work, and so on.
Membership would carry with it an obligation, when requested, to serve on a
particular panel and to give the sort of commitment which membership of a Royal
Commission always entails. The Commission would have to elect an executive board
with a chairman to arrange and conduct its business. All these appointments would be
in the hands of the Commission itself and not of the government. The Commission
would, of course, need a staff which would have to be both sizeable and competent.
They could be career civil servants on secondment, but if this were thought to be
creating an undesirable link between the government and the Commission, it might be
possible to think of a core of staff that belonged to the Commission alone. The
Commission would, within reason, largely determine its own budget, though it would
be subject to public audit like all public bodies.
From the description and specification I have given, you can see that in many ways
we already have such a body to hand, in the shape of the House of Lords. The present
second chamber, however, would be unsuitable — not just because of the hereditary
principle, but more importantly because membership is for life, and, as a result, the
average age is high. It would be an important feature of the scheme I am proposing
that membership of the Commission would not be permanent and that it should
embrace relatively young people as well as those with mature experience.
A body like this might be thought to be in competition with the parliamentary Select
Committees, but I think, in fact, it would be complementary to them. The Select
Committees have shown themselves to be preoccupied with short-term issues and
with the preparation of reports for parliamentary debate. These functions would
continue and they would not be in conflict with those of the new Commission. Where
interests did overlap, I can see no reason why Select Committees should not have a
dialogue with the appropriate panel of the Commission.
The concept of a standing, that is, a permanent Royal Commission is not a new one:
what is new about this suggestion is the limitlessness of the remit I want to give it.
‘Limitlessness’ is perhaps a frightening concept. Would the commission, for instance,
be able to look at the Constitution itself?
How comfortable would we all be if it were to choose to examine such sensitive
issues as the disestablishment of the Church of England, or proportional
representation, or, perhaps, the jury system? I think we would have to accept the risk
of such studies, and I for one would be glad to do so. I would expect limitlessness to
be tempered by the good sense and statesmanlike qualities of the Commission’s
members. I would not want them to be too cautious, but I would expect them to be
sensible. At the end of the day the safeguard would lie in their having no executive
powers. The Commission’s role would be strictly analytical and advisory. It would
still be for Parliament and the government to decide what to do.
But having made this suggestion let no one suppose I am naive enough to believe that
a standing Royal Commission, with wide powers of examination, would transform

7

our system of government. It would at best be one step further along the road to a
more open, participatory democracy. Years of experience have taught me to value the
small steps along the right road above the great leap forward in the dark. In his essay
‘On Compromise’, written just over a century ago, John Morley described the wise
innovator as the man who had learnt how to seize the chance of a small improvement
while working incessantly in the direction of greater ones.
It is this thought which, more than any other, has informed my approach to the subject
of these lectures. Looking back on nearly 40 years’ experience of government, I am
struck not by its deficiencies, which I have perhaps dwelt on over the past six weeks,
but by its strengths. I am struck, too, by the adaptability it has shown to changing
circumstances, always preserving what was best, but being ready to discard what had
become obsolete and irrelevant. This evolutionary quality of our system of
government reflects our pragmatic and cautious approach, as a nation, to change and
reform. It is an approach I instinctively warm to. But caution and conservatism have
their dangers. They can breed complacency and suspicion of change.
The yardsticks I have applied in gauging the need for change have been efficiency and
responsiveness: efficiency because of the incessant need for any institution to achieve
its objectives at lowest cost to those who have to bear it, and responsiveness because
the test of government in any democracy is ultimately its acceptability to those it
governs. If responsiveness has gradually gained the upper hand as my talks have
unfolded, it is because I have found it the more elusive of the two ideals, and the more
difficult to realise. But it is also today the more pressing. As a people we are now
better informed, more politically conscious and less willing to accept external
authority than has ever been the case throughout our history. Our leaders must
recognise these developments, and see them not as something to be resisted and
opposed, but as a challenge which, by being met, can give new life to our democracy.
This is my answer to those who see in some of my ideas costly and cumbrous
machinery which will slow down and impede the dispatch of business and weaken the
effectiveness of government. When the authors of the American Constitution
prescribed their elaborate system of checks and balances, they knew that they were
putting obstacles in the way of swift decisions and decisive action. But their instincts
were right, and 200 years of history have proved this. The reflections which these
lectures have prompted have led me to conclude that we, too, need our checks and
balances, and if the ones I have suggested prove to be inoperable, one day we shall
have to devise others. Above all, we must keep alive the sense of a need for change.
As Woodrow Wilson said: ‘Democracy is like a living thing, always a-making.’ We
owe it to posterity never to allow the ‘a-making’ to seize up.

8

