REITH LECTURES 1983: Government and the Governed
Douglas Wass
Lecture 4: Critical Opposition - Part of the Policy
TRANSMISSION: 30 November 1983 – Radio 4

Simon de Montfort summoned representatives from the shires and the towns in the
year 1265, his aim was to gain the support of the common people in a bid to counter
the growing defection of the nobles from his cause. His concern was not to share his
power but to retain and strengthen it. That first Parliament is a far cry from the one we
know today: a Parliament whose prime duty is to curb and control executive power.
But how effective is Parliament today at exercising the functions of supervision and
control which the 17th-century reformers allotted to it? The model of a supreme
assembly, so well described by Bagehot and Mill, does not correspond to the
Parliaments we have seen for most of the 20th century. The emergence and
strengthening of the party system have given the central government immense
authority over the House of Commons. When I joined the Civil Service I was forcibly
struck by the difference between the formal respect I was taught to pay to the
parliamentary system and the cavalier way in which Whitehall, for the most part, took
the House of Commons for granted.
Fortunately, the last few years have seen something of a parliamentary reaction to the
growth of executive power. But party loyalty still acts as a forceful check on
parliamentary enthusiasm, and this was strikingly demonstrated earlier this year, when
the attempt of a large, all-party group of backbenchers to give Parliament a greater
role in the oversight of the nationalised industries collapsed in the teeth of ministerial
opposition. The whips of the majority party do not hesitate to suppress if they can an
incipient backbench revolt. The prospect of ministerial disapproval, and with it the
possible forfeiture of appointment to a government post, act as a powerful sanction on
the ordinary MP. Parliament’s new desire to oversee the executive can only be
welcomed, because the situation that had developed was inimical both to the
efficiency of government and to its responsiveness to public opinion, expressed
through its representatives. The muting of external criticism and the freedom from the
obligation to justify policy in detail to some external investigative body makes for a
lack of rigour both in thought and action. It involves a risk that decisions will be taken
which, even if they are accepted by Parliament under the threat of party discipline,
may not be accepted by the country at large. Above all, it is liable to create a sense of
alienation between the government and the governed. So some reversal of the trend of
the past century is overdue.
But there is a practical limitation to what the House of Commons can do as a full
assembly to scrutinise the executive. A great deal of its time is devoted to three or
four main activities: to the examination of bills and subordinate legislation which
have simply got to be passed; to the voting of supply; to general debate like foreign
affairs and economic policy; and to the discussion of those issues of importance
which inevitably arise out of the blue in any session. This is the stuff of the House of

1

Commons as a whole, and it is crucially important to the functioning of a
parliamentary democracy. But it involves only general oversight of the executive.
Valuable as this is, it is no substitute for the detailed oversight of the sort that keeps a
whole administration on its toes. How can Parliament best exercise this detailed
oversight? Question Time offers one opportunity to interrogate Ministers. But
although this serves as a safety-valve against arbitrary government, it is not the
occasion for the careful explanation and defence of policy or even the justification of
individual acts of government. Parts of Question Time have become little more than a
parliamentary exercise for the demonstration of ministerial virtuosity and backbench
ingenuity.
It is outside the forum of the whole House that we must seek the opportunities for the
development of parliamentary power, and it is here that some of the most important
and exciting of recent developments have taken place. I am thinking particularly of
the establishment of the Select Committees which now watch over the activities of
identified government departments.
The principle of the Select Committee is not a new one, but in the past the number of
standing committees has been kept small, and they have been confined to such
specific issues as parliamentary procedure, the financial estimates, the nationalised
industries and so on. Many of these committees have registered notable achievements
in focusing attention on the activities of government and its agencies. The most
distinguished has been the Public Accounts Committee, whose function is to call
departments to account for their spending. It does this on the basis of reports which
are produced by a senior official, the Comptroller and Auditor-General, following the
presentation each year of the government’s accounts. It is a long-established
convention that the committee does not challenge the policies which give rise to the
spending. Rather it concentrates on administrative issues, usually specific acts of
government: was the expenditure on some item incurred economically and
effectively? Did it achieve its particular objective? The principal witnesses are civil
servants, usually the permanent head of the department concerned.
The Public Accounts Committee has a formidable reputation in Whitehall, and it
commands great respect from civil servants. It is well briefed and fully equipped to
examine witnesses. I can assure you that few Permanent Secretaries who have to go
before the Public Accounts Committee will allow themselves any private
engagements in the immediate run-up to an appearance. Although the Committee is
concerned primarily with economy and effectiveness, its achievements have not been
confined to the uncovering of inefficiencies and shortcomings in government
administration. One of its great monuments was the pioneering work it did in 1972 on
the taxation of the oil companies operating in the North Sea. It was this work which in
due course ensured that the nation got its proper share of the benefits from our oil
resources.
The success of the Public Accounts Committee lies essentially in its ability to
function as a reasonably unified group of parliamentarians, jealous of the role of
Parliament as guardian of the taxpayer and the citizen. They do not behave like a
group of politicians driven to fight each other on the basis of party loyalty. This is a
most important point, which I will come back to in a moment.

2

The new departmental Select Committees operate quite differently. Their
establishment, in 1979, was the outcome of an explicit decision by the Conservative
Party in opposition, which was then confirmed after its success in the general election
of that year. It is true that the idea of departmental committees sprang from the report
of the Select Committee on Procedure in 1978, but it would certainly not have been
implemented but for the benevolence of the new government. The motive for that
benevolence would make an interesting subject for discussion, but it is not one I
propose to pursue here.
The committees have differed in their interpretation of how best to carry out their
duties, and have adopted a variety of different styles. Many have produced quick,
short reports in order to add something to current controversy, or to influence an
imminent debate in the whole House. Some committees have felt that their most
useful role was to get the facts on the record as quickly as possible, taking evidence
on a particular issue from the principals concerned and publishing it without
comment. One of the most valuable services which the committees have decided that
they can render is to generate a steady flow of factual information to the House,
information which would not have been made available by the executive unprompted.
The committees claim a number of successes in influencing policy or changing the
procedures of the executive.
They instance the new Treasury publication ‘The Autumn Statement’, a document
which gives the House of Commons a financial review at mid-year comparable to
what the Chancellor presents at Budget time. They also lay claim to the amendment of
the ‘sus’ law, and the exposure of the extent of Ministry of Defence disinformation
during the Falklands campaign. But the committees believe that their influence is of a
more continuing, if perhaps less noticeable, kind. As they put it in a combined report
issued last year: ‘The Civil Service has been widely exposed to parliamentary
examination...Equally significant is the deterrent effect on the government of the new
arrangements—the knowledge that members are now able, at short notice, to inquire
into anything that may arise in the administration of departments.’
Well, the committees can perhaps be expected to take a somewhat self-congratulatory
view of their activities. But how does Whitehall, from its admittedly partisan
standpoint, regard their performance?
Whitehall’s instinctive prejudices were evident from the moment that the idea of
departmental committees was first put forward in 1978. There was a body of opinion
which saw some possible value in the existence of a new platform from which
departmental policies could be explained and justified. But many civil servants,
including, I regret to say, myself, viewed the development with concern, because we
expected the committees to delve into matters which, for apparently good reasons, had
been kept confidential, and because, too, we were apprehensive that officials under
public examination would become politically exposed. There is a strong belief in
Whitehall that the principle of a politically neutral Civil Service dictates that its
members should never be seen in public to be associated with any controversial issue.
In the event, most of these fears have not been realised. The anxiety that civil servants
would become identified in public with ministerial policies has been allayed by the
committees’ separation of policy questions—which they have mostly reserved for

3

ministerial witnesses—from questions of fact and analysis, which have formed the
basis for their examination of officials. There have been few breaches of the
convention that officials’ advice to Ministers on policy is privileged and confidential.
None of the facts which the committees have elicited from their studies, even
including those in the delicate area of defence and foreign policy, has harmed the
national interest.
The existence of the committees has, on the other hand, had a number of what I regard
as beneficial effects on policy-making. Some of these I had frankly not foreseen.
The first has been the impact on the thinking of Ministers and civil servants: the
knowledge that your department is going to be examined in detail on the background
to a policy statement is a great encouragement to be rigorous in formulating your
justification for them. And this has indeed happened. If there is evidence or argument
which runs counter to a policy decision, departments now have to be prepared to meet
that evidence and argument head on, and in public. I have seen the effect of this
discipline on the Treasury, as we prepared policy statements like the Budget, or, a
more precise example, the statement in June last year on the overfunding of public
sector debt. One question became commonplace: ‘How do we explain this particular
awkward fact to the Select Committee?’ A further beneficial effect has been to oblige
Whitehall to publish more information— information about policy, about expectations
and about judgments. Again, to quote from my own experience, the Treasury Select
Committee is entitled to credit for drawing from the government estimates of the
revenue from North Sea oil tax, forecasts of the likely course of manufacturing
output, and a number of important assumptions upon which economic policy is
founded. I do not believe there is any valid reason for withholding this sort of
information from the public, but I very much doubt if it would have been made
available if the Select Committee had not pressed for it.
To take another benefit, I think that whenever ministerial decisions are plainly
questionable, their weakness is now more likely to be exposed by the committees than
was possible when the debate and questioning were largely confined to the floor of
the House. What is more, the very existence of the committees has sharpened the
focus for public debate. Their prestige and authority enable them to command
contributions on chosen issues, not just from government departments, but from all
interested parties, including some from abroad. This has certainly been the case with
the Treasury Committee, most notably in its study of monetary policy. Although its
report left a great deal to be desired, the background papers which it requested were
invaluable to public understanding of this complex issue.
But if these are the beneficial effects, the actual performance of the Select
Committees has not to my mind been very impressive. The examination of witnesses
has been superficial. The committees have allowed themselves to be sidetracked by
evidence which was not relevant to their inquiry.
Officials who wanted to stonewall have rarely had difficulty in doing so and they have
been surprised to encounter so little forensic skill. Too often the committees have
failed to prepare themselves adequately for the examination, particularly where the
subject-matter has been general. And, as a result, they have wasted valuable
opportunities to explore the strengths and weaknesses of a departmental position. On

4

occasion, they seem to have allowed their special advisers to determine the form of
the examination, simply reading out prepared questions which they themselves had
not understood. Some of their special advisers seem to use the committees as a means
to assert a purely personal viewpoint, or to elicit information of value to themselves
rather than to the committee. Nor have the committees been greatly interested in
issues which have long-term importance. In this respect, their performance is in
marked contrast to that of the House of Lords Committees, which, while perhaps
taking a more leisurely approach, have been willing to delve into unglamorous
matters which have important long-term implications.
How then could matters be improved? One possible way forward would be for the
Select Committees to hold more private and informal meetings with official
witnesses. At present, the knowledge that every word uttered is on the record and
liable to be quoted acts as a powerful inhibitant on frankness and spontaneity. I
myself learned the lesson of caution after a committee appearance at which I was
asked without notice to give an estimate of a specific and rather difficult issue. Under
strong, and as I thought unreasonable, pressure, I gave a tentative and necessarily
unconsidered view of the matter. That view was subsequently incorporated in the
committee’s report and came to be quoted by commentators years later as though it
had been my considered judgment. Of course, informal proceedings are no substitute
for formal sessions, but they would at least offer an opportunity to the committees to
understand those aspects and nuances of policy which government witnesses find
difficult to express in public and on the record.
I also think that the committees should look closely at their staff support and at the
quality of the briefing they receive. They have nothing comparable to the assistance
which the Public Accounts Committee has from the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral. I am not advocating large staffs on the model of Congressional committees
in America. But some strengthening of politically uncommitted advisers would pay
handsome dividends. The committees should be wary of advisers with strongly
entrenched views.
But there is something more important than the formality of the setting or the strength
of their support. The committees need to ask themselves what degree of commitment
they are prepared to give to their work. Attendances have sometimes been poor and
the mastery of the briefing inadequate. An MP is not always, of course, a full-time
politician, and he has to give a lot of his parliamentary time to his constituents and to
any particular issue he may concern himself with. Moreover, he does all this with
nothing like the staff support the American Congressman has.
Nevertheless, if MPs wish to make a success of the new Select Committee system,
they will have to see membership as a significant call on their time. Their attitude will
be determined by the effect of active committee membership on their political
prospects, and on this we have little evidence to date. I confess I think it unlikely that
many MPs will see membership, or even the chairmanship of a committee, as a
political goal in itself. This factor will inevitably have implications for the way MPs
carry out their committee duties.
Any assessment of the potential of the Select Committee system must recognise the
limits to what Parliament can achieve in supervising the executive. Much of the

5

intellectual inspiration for the new arrangements came from the other side of the
Atlantic, where Congressional committees have formidable powers, and play a
substantial part in the formulation of government policy. I do not believe that our
parliamentary committees can or should aspire to such a position, partly because we
do not enjoy the full separation of powers that is a feature of the American
Constitution, but mainly because of the shadow of the party whip and party discipline
which is cast over the British Member of Parliament.
This shadow is a factor which constantly recurs in any examination of Parliament’s
relationship to the executive. If a Select Committee chooses to study some aspect of
public policy upon which the government and the opposition are divided, it is almost
inescapable that the members of the majority party will rally to the defence of the
government and the opposition members will unite in condemning it. I have in mind,
for example, the occasions when the Treasury Select Committee examines the
Budget, for instance, or the role of monetary policy. On both these issues there were,
and still are, sharp party differences. The Committee, and especially its chairman,
know that a rigorous and unrestrained analysis of the issues would bring out strongly
differing views among the members of the Committee, according to their party
affiliation. This would lead the Committee in its examination to reveal its internal
divisions and to become side-tracked from its principal objective, that of questioning
government witnesses. The last thing the members want is a domestic quarrel, with
their official witnesses from Whitehall watching like amused bystanders.
The committee system does, of course, impose costs on administration. The
committees profess to having concern not to ask for more evidence than is essential.
But the time and the effort Whitehall has devoted to servicing committees are
substantial. Moreover, these financial costs represent the expenditure of scarce
resources, namely the skills and time of busy people, including Ministers. But no one
can pretend that these costs are disproportionate to the gains which the committee
system has produced, and in relation to the costs of the American Congressional
committees they are infinitesimal.
Now, after this catalogue of advantages and disadvantages, I should make my own
view quite clear. The Select Committees have an immensely valuable part to play in
getting at the facts and the analysis which underlie policy, and they have the potential
to perform well in the reviews of the actions and policies of Ministers and
departments, provided these are not the subject of acute party controversy. But for the
burning issues of the day, the only effective forum for debate is the House of
Commons as a whole, where the principal thrust of criticism and examination must
come from the main Opposition parties, and in particular from their front benches.
In so far as a healthy democracy requires an effective official opposition, its resources
should be commensurate with the job it has to do. At present, no provision is made
from public funds beyond the ordinary secretarial assistance, to which all MPs are
entitled. Financial help comes only from party funds, from interest groups who see in
the Opposition a champion of their cause, and to a limited extent from charitable
foundations. By the standards of the resources available to Ministers, these are
exiguous, and this is reflected in the quality of debate and criticism.
The principal deficiencies of the official Opposition are those of staff support, though
there are deficiencies of information too. The Select Committees, and the greater flow

6

of information from the executive which now takes place, have gone some way to
help, but the Opposition still has precious little back-up for the development of its
criticism and questioning. It also lacks the resources to make objective appraisals of
the consequences of its own policy alternatives.
The development of these policy alternatives is a vital function for an effective
opposition, for it is only by presenting to the electorate the option of something
different from the government’s programme that it can hope to obtain office.
But constructive criticism of the government’s policies is also an important duty, not
least to expose their weaknesses and dangers. In neither respect, looking back over 40
years, do I think that our Opposition parties have performed well. They have had little
difficulty, perhaps too little difficulty, in formulating their own proposals and policies.
But the implications of these policies have usually been ill thought out. And the
Opposition has often formed a new administration before its policies have received
the full evaluation which should have preceded the closing of options. But by then the
commitments have been made, and for the time being we have been forced to live
with the consequences. I believe there is a good case in principle for improving the
efficiency of Opposition by providing it with the staff to do its job effectively.
The solution canvassed in some quarters is that we should establish a Department of
the Opposition, staffed with people who would be rather like civil servants: they
would be at the service of the front bench and their salaries would be paid from public
funds. The size of such a department might be measured in terms of perhaps a few
dozen policy advisers plus ancillary staff, and the annual cost might be of the order of
one million pounds — a small sum in relation to the cost of Parliament as a whole.
Each shadow Minister would have, in effect, a Cabinet of officials. Their business
would be to keep a close watch on developments in the area of their chief’s portfolio.
They would provide advice which enabled him to criticise government policy, and
they would put forward constructive alternative proposals. There ought also to be a
handful of co-ordinating officials, serving the shadow Cabinet as a whole in much the
same way that the Central Review Staff, which I talked about in my second lecture,
would serve the real Cabinet.
Well, why do we not have such a department? The answer is that there are both
political and administrative objections. The chief political difficulty is common to any
suggestion that official funding should be given to a political party as distinct from an
official body of Parliament. Our system of government does not formally
acknowledge the existence of parties, and barring a salary to the leader of the official
Opposition it gives no help or recognition to them. Party political broadcasts are the
one exception to this rule: but the way they are allocated usually arouses acute
dissatisfaction among the smaller parties. So while the idea of a Department of the
Opposition might command political support if we had a permanent two- party
system, it is bound to create resentment in a multi-party system. And even if we did
have a two-party system, the patronage of official help enjoyed by the Opposition
would inhibit the emergence of a new party and so entrench and solidify the status
quo.
There would also be political anxiety in the minds of some Opposition supporters that
an official staff would be likely to capture the minds of their front bench and lead

7

them in the direction of pragmatic, non-ideological solutions. I remember a politician
once telling me that one of the advantages of going into opposition was that his party
shed its Civil Service advisers and, as he put it, ‘was able once again to find its soul’.
The fear of some people in politics would be that the Opposition staff and the official
Civil Service would be keeping in regular contact, and sharing the same sources of
information, with the result that they would tend to come up with similar solutions.
The political system would surrender to the middle ground. This is not a view I share,
because the role I see for advisers is not to define political objectives, but to appraise
policies designed to secure the objectives which the politicians set. What applies to
the relationship between Ministers and their officials would also apply to shadow
Ministers and their officials. But a more substantial difficulty lies in the nature of the
career which could be provided for the staff of the Opposition. What would happen to
them when the Opposition won a parliamentary majority and became the government
of the day? I find it hard to imagine that the staff would then serve the new
Opposition, however willing and able they might be to do this. The problem of
developing a working relationship with their new political chiefs might not itself be
insuperable. The real difficulty would lie in the unwillingness of the new government
to dispense with its old advisers. Ministers form strong attachments to their personal
staffs, and the natural desire of a newly appointed Minister, taking office after a
period in opposition, would be to retain his old advisers. But to bring them into a
department and place them in senior administrative positions would be disruptive in
much the same way as the filling of administrative posts by political appointees.
Moreover, the new staff would be thought of as political appointees, and if there were
a further change of government their position would be insecure. They would be
expected to resign with their political chiefs and to serve them again in opposition. In
short we would have created a political Civil Service, however politically
uncommitted in a party sense that service might be.
These difficulties would remain even if the Department of the Opposition were staffed
by ordinary civil servants on secondment — rather as the Cabinet Office is now. Such
secondments would have to be for a whole Parliament or at any rate the whole
lifetime of an administration, because I cannot see Ministers or shadow Ministers
liking an arrangement under which their advisers could be arbitrarily transferred to
their political opponents. I once had quite a problem myself when one of my
colleagues resigned from the Civil Service to take a political appointment with the
Opposition. The episode created a feeling of distinct and understandable unease on
the part of my Minister.
In spite of all these difficulties I do believe that the cause of effective government
would be greatly served if we could strengthen the support given to the official
Opposition. What I would like to see is a limited experiment. We would second a
small number of civil servants to the Opposition on the basis of a fixed period of not
more than five years and on the firm understanding that they would then be returned
to the Civil Service and given a purely managerial post away from the political stage.
Provided these safeguards were respected, an arrangement like this would avoid the
dangers of politicisation that I have described, and would give the Opposition the sort
of professional help it needs. By treating the idea as experimental, we would bring to
the surface any defects it might contain, and we would be able to revise it if
necessary. I believe our system of government would survive such an experiment. It
might well, indeed, acquire new life from it.

8

