REITH LECTURES 1983: Government and the Governed
Douglas Wass
Lecture 2: Cabinet: Directorate or Directory?
TRANSMISSION: 16 November 1983 – Radio 4

Anyone who has had the privilege of mingling with the assembly of Cabinet Ministers
as they wait outside the Cabinet room at Number Ten could be forgiven for mistaking
it for the preliminary to a Sunday-school outing. These 20 or so men and women bear
with equanimity, even light heartedness, the formidable task which lies ahead: the
resolution of weighty issues which will affect, perhaps change, the lives of their
fellow citizens. But once Cabinet begins, it is all quite different, or at least it is all said
to be different, because I am speaking from hearsay as I have never assisted my
Minister at a Cabinet meeting. The highest organ of executive government meets very
privately, usually once a week, for two or three hours. A summary of its discussion is
circulated the day after the meeting, and Whitehall, or that part of it which is now
allowed to see the record, eagerly scrutinises its marching orders.
But the term ‘marching orders’ is a misnomer. Cabinet does not behave like a high
command issuing orders to its field officers. And Cabinet minutes rarely tell the
reader what the strategy of the government is, still less how the strategy is to be
prosecuted. Military men who go into politics must find the workings of government
even more frustrating than businessmen do.
Every organisation needs a central directing authority, and in the British system of
government the doctrine of collective responsibility places the Cabinet in that role.
But how well does it do its job? Is the Cabinet an efficient body? Could it be made
more effective? These are the questions I shall be trying to answer this week.
Let me start with the composition of the Cabinet. Each departmental Minister is an
individual with specific functions usually defined by statute. He has an experienced
department at his service, able both to advise him on the ordering of his priorities and
to dispatch work in accordance with his directions. He and his department are closely
in touch with the groups whose special interests are affected by his responsibilities.
And while, as I shall argue, he may in this decision-taking not always incline himself
as much as I would wish to long-term and structural issues, on his own ground each
Minister is an impressive force, almost irrespective of his personal qualities.
But when he comes together with his colleagues in Cabinet things assume a different
form. The machinery which exists within departments to give Ministers a perspective
of all their activities, a set of suggested objectives end a ranking of priorities, is
missing in the collective forum of the Cabinet. Ministers in Cabinet rarely look at the
totality of their responsibilities, at the balance of policy, at the progress of the
government towards its objectives as a whole. Apart from its ritual weekly review of
foreign affairs end parliamentary business, Cabinet’s staple diet consists of a selection
of individually important one off cases or of issues on which the Ministers
departmentally concerned are unable to agree.

1

The form and structure of a modern Cabinet and the diet it consumes almost oblige it
to function like a group of individuals, and not as a unity. Indeed, for each Minister,
the test of his success in office lies in his ability to deliver his departmental goals. Mr.
Macmillan’s 300,000 houses provided him with the initial success which eventually
took him to Number Ten. No Minister I know of has won political distinction by his
performance in Cabinet or by his contribution to collective decision taking. To the
country and the House of Commons he is simply the Minister for such-and- such a
department, and the only member of the Cabinet who is not seen in this way is the
Prime Minister.
None of this is new. Richard Crossman’s diaries describe vividly how Ministers
participate in Cabinet as departmental champions. Lord Rothschild recalls how he
once stole e glimpse of e Minister’s brief for Cabinet: the departmental officials who
had drawn it up had thoughtfully marked one heading for discussion with the
comment ‘This item is of no interest to you.’ What a far cry this is from Rousseau’s
ideal of the general will being more than the summation of the special interests of
individual groups!
The characteristics I have described carry with them two main consequences. The first
consequence is that the general thrust of the government’s policies is seldom, if ever,
reviewed and assessed by Cabinet; strategic changes of course in response to
substantial shifts in circumstances are not subjected to collective consideration; and
the ordering of priorities is discussed in only the most general terms. I am not saying
that these matters are never reviewed by governments: I can recall several important
policy changes in the field of economic management which governments have made
as the result of a deliberate reassessment. But they were not usually Cabinet reviews;
and none of them was the result of a systematic study. The second consequence is that
Cabinet does not have adequate safeguards against a strong departmental Minister. An
issue which comes to Cabinet is presented by the Minister whose interests and
reputation are involved, and he is bound to be partisan. No mechanism exists to
enable the Cabinet to challenge his view unless the interests of another Minister are
involved, and even then the challenge itself may be partisan. Cabinet can too easily be
railroaded.
It would be wrong to suggest that senior politicians have been blind to the defects of
Cabinet government as we know it. Fifty years ago, Leo Amery, himself an
experienced Minister, was writing that ‘a Cabinet consisting of a score of overworked
departmental Ministers is quite incapable of either thinking out a definite policy or of
securing its effective and consistent execution’. In recent years several Prime
Ministers have sought to engage the attention of their colleagues on matters of
strategy, frequently setting aside a day at Chequers to emphasise the distinction
between a wide-ranging review of policy and the day-to-day preoccupations of
Downing Street. The idea is a good one, but its application has not led to any marked
change in the collective performance of Cabinets. Seminars, too, have been held on
matters as general and strategic as the fight against inflation, the control of public
expenditure, energy conservation and so on. But they have taken place at such a high
level of generality and abstraction that they have rarely led to any discernible change
when it came to particular cases. To be told simply that the Cabinet has decided to
give high priority to fighting inflation or to the solution of the Rhodesian problem is

2

not much help to the officials who have to translate aspirations into action.
I can think of two possible institutional changes which might help Cabinets to
function more cohesively in their approach to policy as a whole. The first would be to
bias the composition of the Cabinet away from the departmental Minister. The second
would be to supply the Cabinet with a staff whose job would be to identify the issues
and choices which Cabinet must face as a collective entity. I want to look at these two
ideas in turn.
One way to reduce the influence of the departmental Minister would he to restructure
the Cabinet completely and create a high command on the model of the War Cabinets
of 1916 and 1939. The Cabinet would be a small, closely-knit group of senior
Ministers who would be mainly without departmental responsibilities: they would not
therefore have any prior commitment on any issue by virtue of their office. Ministers
in charge of departments would be outside the Cabinet and would come to it as
supplicants to a higher body, not as equal members of it. It would be for departmental
Ministers to decide, as now, which issues required Cabinet approval and which did
not. But, once a matter went to the Cabinet, the departmental Minister would have
less of a voice in the decision than he has now. He might well find himself having to
stomach decisions affecting his responsibilities with which he did not agree. And
these he would have to defend in public. The attractions of departmental office would
diminish, but, by the same token, membership of the small ‘inner’ Cabinet would
greatly enhance the authority and power of the individual concerned. Cabinet
members would be largely free from the appalling administrative burdens to which
departmental Ministers are subject: the business of answering parliamentary
questions, meetings with interest groups, representation at meetings abroad and so on.
They would be able to concentrate upon policy in its broadest sense. What is more,
they would have time, as the present type of Cabinet does not, to think about the
longer- term aspects of current issues.
A system like this has a lot of attractions. One of the most eloquent expressions of its
virtues was given in a speech Lord Curzon made to the House of Lords in 1918, when
he contrasted the effectiveness of the first War Cabinet at dispatching business with
that of the conventional Cabinet. The idea bears a family resemblance to a proposal
made by the Plowden Committee, when it reviewed the control of public expenditure
in 1961. In that instance, the idea was to strengthen the hand of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer by creating a Committee of Cabinet Ministers, mainly without portfolios,
to determine the level of all the departmental spending programmes. Here, too,
spending Ministers were to come as supplicants and not as full members. Several
attempts have been made in the past 25 years to implement this proposal, and the
Treasury has nearly always supported them. But each attempt has ended abortively,
mainly because no spending Minister who was strongly opposed to the conclusions of
the Cabinet Committee would relinquish his right of appeal to the full Cabinet in
which, of course, he was a full member and where he could expect a more
sympathetic hearing. The inner Cabinet idea is free from the defect of appeal, as its
decisions would be final.
Nevertheless, there are powerful objections to it. Churchill himself was reluctant to
have his War Cabinet composed entirely of non-departmental Ministers, and he
expressed the view that they ‘tend to become more and more theoretical supervisors

3

and commentators reading an immense amount of material every day, but doubtful
how to use their knowledge without doing more harm than good’.
I sympathise with this view. In my experience of administration I have found it almost
impossible to think constructively about general policy issues if I have not been
involved in particular practical cases. I have often discussed with my fellow civil
servants the question of how to give more attention to longer-term problems. We have
considered, as indeed the Fulton Report recommended, whether the task of strategic
thinking could be given to planning units who would be free from the cares of day-today administration. But we have usually concluded that only by being involved in
everyday issues can people identify the longer-term general problems and construct
suitable solutions.
Even more worrying, I see a real possibility that, with a Cabinet of eight or so
Ministers without portfolio, individual members would tend to become specialists in
certain areas. One Minister might focus on foreign policy, one on social policy and so
on. The departmental Minister would then identify the relevant Cabinet member
whose ear it was moat worth his while to catch. He would be invited to departmental
presentations, and supplied with personal departmental briefing, all to get him on the
department’s side. Gradually, what might emerge would be a collection of superdepartmental Ministers, rather like the overlords which Churchill devised in his
peacetime administration in 1951. That was not by any means a success. It may be
that in time of war, when there is a single overriding aim to be pursued, the idea is
viable. But I am driven to the conclusion, reluctantly, that in peacetime, when the
government has many different objectives, the inner Cabinet concept would not be a
satisfactory solution to the problem I have identified.
Another, less radical approach to Cabinet reform might be to develop our system of
Cabinet committees. New committees would be set up to review specific issues like
housing, the social services, transport, the functioning of the nationalised industries
and so on. They could accommodate the Ministers directly involved, together with a
number who had no relevant departmental responsibilities. Their composition would
enable them not only to oversee a whole field of policy but also to ensure that the
Ministers functionally involved were not carried away by their departments and
lobbies. But it would also be their job to relate the policy area within their purview to
the government’s broader political objectives.
Cabinet committees have not in the past functioned as review bodies or strategic
commands, though the word ‘strategy’, whether hopefully or misleadingly, baa
sometimes been incorporated in their title. Most of them have been preoccupied with
the kind of case-work where there has been a regular need for interdepartmental
consultation and co-ordination. When the government of the day has had a prices and
incomes policy, for instance, a Cabinet committee has been set up to clear individual
problems and to ensure consistency of application by all departments. It is true that
committees have been established as a one-off measure to review particular policies
and to produce a report, but this has been more common at the official than at the
ministerial level. I cannot recall any government systematically establishing Cabinet
committees with the purposes and aims I have described.
It would be a fair question to ask whether I would have liked to see such a committee

4

operating in the field of financial and economic policy while I was at the Treasury.
The honest answer has to be that I would have found it a great nuisance, and I am sure
the Chancellors I have served would have done too. Rut I have to concede that it
would have been an excellent discipline for the Treasury and that only good could
have come from the independent scrutiny of our assumptions and doctrines; and it
would have done much to give non-Treasury Ministers a greater sense of participation
in the management of the economy.
While each review committee might be able to co-ordinate the various facets of the
policy for which it was responsible and to oversee the work of the relevant
departments, a network of them would not necessarily help in the integration of
government policy as a whole. No body below the level of Cabinet can do that. Hut I
do believe that the ides of Cabinet review committees having standing remits and
being obliged, as I hope they would be, to produce an annual report for Cabinet would
do quite a lot to make the Cabinet into a more corporate body.
There is, of course, a school, of which Mr Crossman was a member, which argues that
we should frankly acknowledge that the British Cabinet as we know it is not able to
act like a high command. This school would like to develop still further the notion
that the Prime Minister is the only person in charge of government policy as a whole,
and hence the only person who can determine priorities. To realise this concept in full,
the Prime Minister would need a department of advisers in much the same way that
the American President has his army of personal staff in the Executive Offices of the
White House.
But giving the Prime Minister the responsibility and the means to co-ordinate policy,
to order priorities and to challenge in detail the proposals of individual departments,
would be very difficult to reconcile with the principle of collective responsibility as
we know it. We would be taking a significant step towards a presidential form of
government, with a single chief executive advised and assisted by departmental
chiefs. The Prime Minister would have the power to impose his will on the Cabinet in
a way that we have never known, even in war. The Cabinet would begin to resemble
the American Cabinet, which is little more than a consultative body for the President.
Those who would like to see the Prime Minister assume greater responsibilities argue
that he is already in a dominating position. He alone has the power to appoint and
dismiss Ministers, and to control the composition of Cabinet committees. He it is who
decides what may or may not go on the Cabinet agenda, and when to go to the
country. Moreover, the Prime Minister has come to expect to be consulted, personally
and outside the Cabinet, by departmental Ministers when they are contemplating
important steps within their own competence. For instance, every Chancellor I have
worked for has obtained the Prime Minister’s agreement to changes, even quite trivial
ones, in the way the economy is run. The pure doctrine of collective responsibility
should surely have required the Chancellor to consult the Cabinet as a whole if he felt
ha needed backing, but this he did not do.
On top of this, economic summits, European Council meetings, Prima Minister’s
Question Time and so on, have all led to a much greater involvement of the Prime
Minister in what used to he purely departmental affairs. Finally, our general elections
have assumed something of the character of presidential contests.

5

In spite of these developments, I believe the Cabinet remains the supreme governing
body and I believe it is right that it should be. Prime Ministers are not, like Presidents,
elected by direct suffrage. Indeed, within the past 30 years, four of our seven Prime
Ministers have taken office without having won a general election. More importantly,
the fact that the power to take decisions on major policy resides in the Cabinet, and
not in the Prime Minister alone, has provided us with a valuable constitutional check.
Prime Ministers have to take account of Cabinet revolts and Cabinet opposition.
Cabinet represents a cross-section of the majority party, and its decisions, in my view,
are more likely to command parliamentary support than decisions of the Prime
Minister alone. For these reasons, I would not favour any further strengthening of the
Prime Minister’s position in relation to his colleagues.
All this suggests that, despite the weaknesses of Cabinet as a collective entity, there
are no easy institutional alternatives to what we have at present. But before I look at
my second suggestion, I want to deal with an issue which has been widely canvassed
over the last few years: the idea that the Prime Minister, within the present structure
of Cabinet government and by virtue of the role he has already acquired, should have
a staff of his own. Without such a staff, so the argument goes, the Prime Minister is at
the mercy of the departmental Minister and his advisers, and will rapidly become the
creature of the departmental brief. I have never been persuaded by this argument. As
the Prime Minister has been drawn into departmental business he has found it possible
to call directly on the services of the official advisers in the departments concerned.
During the past dozen years or so, many officials, some of them quite junior, have
become familiar with the inside of Number Ten, having been summoned to give
personal briefing on issues with which the Prime Minister has become involved.
While, of course, these advisers owe their first allegiance to their departmental
Minister, they would never withhold help or information from the Prime Minister. I
would not deny that where a departmental Minister was pursuing a policy of which
the Prime Minister was only a lukewarm supporter he might be reluctant to see his
officials supplying information which did not support his line; and in theory he could
instruct his officials not to communicate directly with Number Ten. But if this
unhappy situation did emerge, it would be an indication of a fundamentally unhealthy
situation in Cabinet, which should really be resolved by other means than the creation
of a Prime Minister’s department.
So, if my thoughts lead me to the conclusion that, with the possible exception of
Cabinet Review Committees, we are unlikely to promote strategic decision-taking by
reforming the system of government, where is it that we should be looking for
improvement? I think the answer lies in some strengthening of the staff which serves
the Cabinet as a whole.
As government is now organised, the Cabinet as a body has at its own service only the
Cabinet Secretariat. This is a tiny staff, headed by the Cabinet Secretary, and its job is
to prepare the agendas and compile the minutes of meetings of both Cabinet and the
Cabinet committees. It also briefs the various chairmen of the Cabinet and its
committees, but it does so mainly, if not indeed entirely, on procedural matters.
Where a clearly exposed conflict has emerged, it may suggest a possible compromise

6

to the chairman. But its advice is privy to the chairman and it is not available to the
Cabinet or to the Cabinet committee as a whole.
Clearly, this is not the body I have in mind to strengthen the directing capability of
Cabinet. Something of what we need is to be found in the role originally seen for the
Central Policy Review Staff—known in Whitehall, with its affection for initials, as
the CPRS and to the wider public, more graphically, as the Think Tank.
When the CPRS was set up in 1970 a White Paper was issued defining its functions.
The main task seen for it was to work out the implications of the government’s basic
strategy in terms of particular policies. For instance, if the government set the defeat
of inflation as a strategic objective, the Review Staff would be expected to say what
contribution could be made to this aim from such areas as public sector pricing,
indirect taxation, the exchange rate, public borrowing and so on. The idea was to
produce a well- orchestrated and co-ordinated attack on the problem, and not to set
about it in piecemeal fashion. Another function the architects of the CPRS had in
mind was that it would suggest relative priorities for different parts of the
government’s programme. It would offer views, for instance, on whether more
resources should be put into industrial policy and fewer into social policy. Another
task would be to identify those areas of policy where a completely new approach
might be made: the unthinkable, by implication, was not to be excluded. Finally, it
was thought that the CPRS might be the instrument for ensuring that, when Ministers
looked at new policy options, all the implications of each option would be brought to
the surface. If Ministers were thinking of some shift in our external trade policy, for
instance, the CPRS might be expected to examine the effect of this shift on industry
and employment in the different regions, on consumer prices, on foreign policy and so
on.
The CPRS had a chequered history and it was abolished earlier this year. These two
facts ought to make anyone hesitate before proposing to resurrect it. At the very least
we have to ask why it did not give satisfaction to its ministerial chiefs. There are
many reasons for this. In the first place, the role it was given was too ambitious. I do
not believe a small central staff by itself can be expected to identify new areas of
workable policy which have somehow escaped the attention of the expert department.
Nor can it really evaluate the implications of alternative courses: that, too, is best left
to the specialists. What the Think Tank should have concentrated on was what I have
called ‘the balance of policy’: in other words, the way the government’s programmes
fitted into its strategic objectives and the way it ordered its priorities. It should also
have taken more seriously the job of criticising departmental proposals where it had
evidence that they had unperceived implications for other parts of the programme.
The CPRS never had enough staff to perform even these more limited tasks. Its first
chief insisted on keeping its size down to the level at which all the members could sit
round his personal conference table. A central analytical staff which is to carry out
more than superficial appraisals of policy must be prepared to do a lot of detailed
work, on a continuing basis and in a wide variety of areas, if it is to make any
worthwhile judgments about the whole. It must have the time and capacity to master
the intricacies of a good deal of government activity, in the same sort of way that the
Treasury expenditure divisions do. In the Treasury, there are about four times as many
people engaged in this ‘marking’ role as there were in the CPRS, and this provides a

7

measure of the relative depth in which each organisation was able to tackle any
problem. But, despite its small size, the CPRS embarked on many studies which were
plainly not its job. Its examination of the car industry was something that should have
been done by the Department of Industry, and its review of Britain’s overseas
representation could well have been done by the Civil Service Department. As time
went by, it concerned itself less and less with central issues and became a meddler in
departmental business. The decision to abolish it was a not unjustified recognition that
it had lost its way and no longer filled the role intended for it. But one reason why the
CPRS was not able to provide the Cabinet with the service which its architects had
envisaged was that it was only rarely engaged in the day-to-day business of
government at the working level. Its activities were episodic, a foray here and a foray
there. And not being continuously involved, as the Treasury has to be, in all the
various and important parts of the government’s programme, it was unable to
comment authoritatively on the whole.
But if the Central Policy Review Staff failed to realise the hopes that were originally
placed in it, must we infer that all attempts to create a body which can serve the
Cabinet as a whole and supply it with strategic appraisals are doomed? I do not think
we have to be quite so pessimistic.
To avoid a repetition of the failure and disappointments of the CPRS, I believe that a
newly established central analytical staff would need to be given new guidelines and
safeguards. It should be given the resources needed for what would be a demanding
role, a role which, as I have hinted, would draw it into Whitehall’s day-to-day
business. Fortunately, the record of departmental cooperation with the old CPRS was
good. But to make absolutely sure that the Review Staff was in touch with
departmental business, it would have to be closely involved in the annual public
expenditure survey and it should be represented at all the bilateral meetings between
the Treasury and the spending Ministers, not least to ensure that the Cabinet had, in
effect, a watching brief over any private deals which might be struck. I would also
want it to produce its own report as the survey proceeded and to suggest its own
solutions to the problems of choice which the survey invariably presents, and which I
referred to in my first lecture. To those who would argue that I would be creating a
duplication of effort at the centre of government, I reply that this would be a small
price to pay for a more effective centre.
But another feature of the staff that I think would be essential is that it should he
freestanding in the structure of Whitehall. It should be the servant of the Cabinet as a
whole and should not become, as the CPRS did, the creature of the Prime Minister
alone. Indeed, it is arguable that the sidetracking of the CPRS into specialist areas like
industry was due to pressure from Number Ten, rather than a result of its own work
programme.
With these safeguards and with encouragement from the Cabinet as a whole to offer
bold and provocative advice about the balance of policy, a unit like this would force
Ministers in their collective embodiment to realise that they have to make choices,
and that by facing the issues which those choices impose they stand only to gain, If
we persist in ignoring the need of our political masters for the help which a Review
Staff could provide, we shall be choosing, in our typically British way, to go on
muddling through.

8

