REITH LECTURES 1983: Government and the Governed
Douglas Wass
Lecture 5: Opening Up Government.
TRANSMISSION: 7 December 1983 – Radio 4
On July 13 this year, the House of Commons voted by large majorities not to
reintroduce capital punishment. Market research surveys at the time, however,
showed that the mass of public opinion was in favour of restoration. The wide gap
between the popular preference and the preference of our elected representatives is
something which should trouble us all: it is symptomatic of some malfunctioning of
the democratic process. It does not seem to me to be satisfactory either to say that the
representatives should have deferred to the wishes of those they represent, or to claim
that they need take no account of their constituents’ views—that their duty, once
elected, is simply to obey their own conscience.
We need to ask ourselves why there is such a gap between the public and its
representatives on this, as, indeed, on other issues. The gap must result from the
different perceptions each of them has of where the public interest lies. And those
perceptions differ, in part at any rate, because of differences in the quality of the
debate and differences in the information available. Raising the quality of public
debate, and providing the public with the material on which to make an informed
judgment on matters of public policy are two major requirements if we are to make
the government process operate efficiently and responsively.
I referred a moment ago to the public interest. It is a phrase I rarely use, for it conveys
the dubious impression that there is some national interest which transcends the
interests of us all as individuals. I do not believe in such a concept, and I speak of the
public interest only to denote what our collective will as a society would be if we had
access to all the relevant facts and we had a consistent and perceived set of value
preferences. If there is a public interest, an informed public is the best judge of where
it lies.
It is of course an illusion to suppose that the popular approach to public issues could
ever be as informed and sophisticated as that of the responsible expert. But it is surely
a counsel of despair to write off public opinion on complex issues. When he declared
that ‘Public opinion is everything. . . With it nothing can fall. Without it nothing can
succeed’, Abraham Lincoln was indulging in a little high-flown rhetoric. But his
sentiments rested on firm ground.
The challenge facing any democratic society therefore is to secure a more informed
public, not least with the aim of eliminating those unhappy gulfs in choices which
occasionally open up between those in government and those they represent.
This task falls primarily to our political leaders. It is for them to explain and defend
their decisions as they are made and to persuade us of the rightness of those decisions.
But there is a need of a more continuing nature—a need for governments on a
systematic basis to publish the information they possess which will contribute to

1

public understanding of policy issues. But let me disclaim any expectation that the
greater availability of information will of itself transform the situation. The haul is a
long one and no contribution can be rejected.
Governments, of course, are not by any means the sole source of information on
matters of public interest. Pressure groups, independent research bodies, academic
workers, all make it their business to see that we are an informed society. The
privileged access to information which is often attributed to government can be much
exaggerated. Take the case of economic forecasts, which have been a concern of mine
for a long time. Before the government decided to release them, it used to be held that
the public were seriously deprived of information which could help them to make a
judgment on economic policy. There may have been something in this ten or so years
ago. But the demand for publication of official forecasts took little account of the
existence of independent, non-official forecasts based on much the same factual and
analytical material as was embodied in the Treasury’s own work. The reliability of
most of these independent forecasts was not noticeably inferior to the Treasury’s. It is
true that if parts of the Treasury forecast are not published, Parliament and the public
do not have access to the same information as the government and may not be able to
test the internal consistency of policy. But public understanding of policy issues can
often be adequate for the purposes of reaching an informed view, even when the
information it is based on is not as complete as the government’s.
Another qualification I would make about information is really about privacy: the
privacy of government decision-taking. There are many who believe that the public’s
entitlement to know what is decided on its behalf—an entitlement I do not for a
moment challenge—extends to an entitlement to know the content of the detailed
discussions through which the executive government reaches its decisions. I cannot
accept this. In the process of making up its mind on policy a government will examine
several options, together with their supporting arguments. All these options save one
it will discard, and in presenting its preferred course it will wish to stress the
arguments which support it. Its advocacy of its chosen policy could be materially
undermined if it were known to have entertained quite different choices, and to have
placed weight on arguments it subsequently wished to play down.
The doctrine of collective responsibility would be damaged as differences within the
Cabinet were made explicit. What the invasion of government privacy would lead to
is the conduct of government business by surreptitious means. Ideas would be
exchanged in an unrecordable form. Internal debate would be inhibited. Indeed, recent
unauthorised leaks of long-term government thinking in the social field seem to have
had the effect of stifling discussion in Whitehall. This must surely be inimical to good
government.
We need to accept therefore that the internal deliberations of government, the
comment and advice which one part of Whitehall gives to another, should be
protected by the ordinary rules of privacy. The interval which should elapse before
historians have full access to public papers is something that can be argued about. The
present rule is that government documents are not released for 30 years—this being
judged to be the interval which has to elapse to free those who participate in
government from the embarrassment of seeing their recent thoughts, differences and
doubts exposed to public view, and hence to avoid inhibiting the free and trenchant

2

expression of views in Whitehall, without which no government can function
effectively. Neither of these considerations, in my view, justifies a period of secrecy
as long as 30 years. Except possibly in the area of foreign policy, where our relations
with other countries may require a lengthy period of discretion, I would favour a
much shorter interval, so as to permit historians to carry out documentary research
while they still have the chance to talk to those who made policy.
But to return to the question of what may be currently released. It is, I believe, in the
field of factual and analytical material that governments could and should play a more
constructive part, for it is here that they possess a wealth of data, much of which is not
released to the private citizen or to Parliament.
Government departments commission research, carry out surveys, study what is
happening in other countries and generally establish a good and thorough
informational base upon which to make policy. They also, of course, have a
substantial body of incidental evidence from ongoing administration: evidence like
the statistics of social security beneficiaries, the income distribution of the tax-paying
public, the accuracy of a weapons system and so on. Most of this information would
not be readily available to the public, unless the government supplied it. Much of it is
of some public interest and it is difficult to see why in a democracy it should not be
published.
The record of British governments in publishing this sort of material is by no means a
discreditable one, particularly in recent years. What is more, senior civil servants are
now willing to expose themselves to public interviews and these give them
opportunities to deploy nonpartisan information relevant to policy.
Nevertheless, a suspicion exists that departments do not go out of their way to
disclose information—certainly information which sits uneasily with the chosen
policy. It is unsatisfactory for Parliament to have to rely on its own alertness and
astuteness in eliciting material from the government. This state of affairs has aroused
interest in some statutory obligation on the government to publish its privileged
information or to provide access to its own records.
So far, all British governments have resisted a Freedom of Information Act. But short
of providing a statutory right, governments have developed an informal system which
inclines more markedly towards publication. The most significant development was
the directive in 1976 which the then Head of the Civil Service, Lord Croham, issued
to all Permanent Secretaries. This decreed that the background material relating to
policy studies and reports would be published unless Ministers explicitly decided it
would not. It declared that the aim normally would be to publish as much as possible,
and that when policy studies were being undertaken the background material should
be written in a form that would permit its publication. It was a significant step
forward, and the record of the flow of information which is being released is
impressive. It was widely welcomed by the press and by other bodies like Justice,
particularly that aspect of the directive which placed in the hands of Ministers, and
not officials, any decision not to publish. But critics have rightly noted that the control
of information remains firmly in Whitehall’s hands and that there is no provision for
checking up on, or auditing the observance of the directive. The citizen has to depend
on the unsupervised conscientiousness of officials and Ministers. There is some

3

reassurance for us in the quantity of material which is now published compared with
what was released only five years ago. But there remains concern that the absence of
audit will allow backsliding.
This concern is entirely justified. It is not that I believe that officials have consciously
sought to evade the terms of the directive; rather the contrary. They have been pleased
to see greater opportunities for the publication of their analytical work, especially
when it has been possible to give attribution. But the difficulty of writing a piece of
analysis in a form that would permit it to be published has sometimes proved to be
serious. Fortunately for good administration, the natural disposition of an official is to
write without restraint. But the effect of this frankness has been that a significant
number of background papers have been found to contain material which, for one
reason or another, has militated against publication.
The reasons for deciding against publication have often been nothing more weighty
than political embarrassment. Like, I imagine, many of my former colleagues, I have
seen a certain amount of departmental analysis which has not fully supported
government policy or government statements about the effects of policy. A quiet
decision not to publish has then been the easy way out. One of the safeguards which
commentators saw in the 1976 directive—the placing of the responsibility for the
decision not to publish on Ministers—while well-intentioned, has turned out to be
based on a fallacy. In my experience, Ministers are far more apprehensive than their
official advisers about the threat to policy that the publication of damaging or Unsupportive material can pose. Officials tend to take a more sceptical view about the
vulnerability of policy to factual material which is inconsistent with it. And if the
material is systematically unsupportive, officials are more likely to wish to see a
change of line than their ministerial superiors, who may well have invested a lot of
personal political capital in the policy they are pursuing.
But if openness is the aim, are there any limits to the material which in a democracy
should be more or less automatically released to the public? Clearly in the field of
defence, and to a lesser extent foreign relations, there might have to be some
withholding provisions. It would be damaging to national security to give all the
performance details of a new weapons system. On the other hand, an informed debate
on defence issues can only take place on the basis of such information, and
governments ought to strike a reasonable balance between openness and security even
here. It is outside the area of national security that I see little cause to be restrictive
about publication. It is often argued that the disclosure of some material would be
damaging because of its effect on public expectations or on the public acceptance of
government policy. Forecasts of unemployment, for instance, have been regarded as
likely to strengthen opposition to a tough economic programme and to impair its
prospects of success. And the same arguments have been used about forecasts of
inflation. It was argued in 1976, for instance, that the disclosure of a very high
inflation forecast following the fall in the exchange rate that year made the position of
trade union leaders difficult in securing their members’ acquiescence in the
government’s pay norm. In another area, the release of key economic information
such as the financial operations of the Bank of England in the foreign exchange
market, has been thought to be potentially harmful to those operations, for instance by
revealing market tactics and policy objectives. Having lived with these dilemmas for a
very long time, I have become profoundly sceptical about the arguments for secrecy.

4

Step by step over the years we have published more and more material which
previous generations of officials had thought to be dangerous. In the event,
publication has caused very little, if indeed any damage. The onus, I now believe,
ought to lie heavily on those who oppose publication to justify their opposition.
Furthermore, I believe it may now be unwise to leave entirely to ministerial discretion
decisions about publishing information which would otherwise be available only to
government. I hinted a moment ago at the possibility of audit. An alternative approach
would be to give the public the right of access to official files, subject to certain
limited safeguards.
Let me look at the idea of audit first of all. It is an attractive one, because it would
ensure that ministers were not judges in their own cause. Like financial audit, it would
provide the public with an independent judgment about the propriety of an executive
decision. The procedure would have to be that of audit and not of appeal, because
appeal against a ministerial decision is possible only when the decision is known, and
a decision not to publish is not usually known. To be effective, an audit would require
staff with full access to official files. The auditors would be empowered to make
reports to Parliament whenever they encountered a decision not to publish or not to
make publicly available factual and analytical material which did not satisfy the
criteria for exemption. The staff themselves would not be able to disclose the
information, but they would be able to alert Parliament to its suppression and to
oblige the Minister concerned to defend his decision before the relevant Select
Committee, if need be in closed session.
The hope, and indeed the expectation, would be that the existence of audit in the
information field, as in the financial field, would ensure that the government
rigorously lived up to its stated intentions. The number of occasions where an auditor
raised objections could well be small and I suspect that governments would find it a
more workable system than they might think.
But keen as I am to see more obligations laid on the government to publish, I have to
acknowledge some serious impediments in the way of an external audit system. It
would be costly in terms of manpower even if it operated, like financial audit, on a
sample basis. Even more important than this, it might actually become an inhibiting
factor in the minds of those who gather factual and analytical material. Departments
which feared that some evidence could turn out to be inconsistent with poliey might
be tempted not to collect it. Ministers might expressly forbid the carrying out of
certain research. This may sound fanciful, but I have, I fear, experienced a number of
cases, even under the present system, where Ministers have been much exercised over
research done without their full knowledge, and where the findings have not
supported their policy statements.
To compound this tendency would be damaging to the convention in Whitehall which
happily still permits a large degree of freedom to officials in the assembly of factual
material. Then there are the practical difficulties which the auditors would face when
they came across material which was partly factual and partly advisory. Nevertheless,
the idea of an information audit is worth pursuing, and if I am not prepared at present
to recommend it wholly without reservation, I do believe it merits serious study.

5

Our progress towards a more open society now lags behind that of several other
mature democracies. They, however, have not chosen the route of audit: instead they
have laid a duty on the executive to provide facilities for the citizen to inspect official
files. The Scandinavian countries have well-established open systems, the Swedes
since the 18th century. The United States Congress passed its Freedom of Information
Act in 1966. Australia, Canada and New Zealand have all followed the American
lead. That so many countries have decided on this course encourages the belief that it
is a workable solution. ‘Workability’ is a test that must be applied to any
administrative system, and it is worth looking at how our sister democracies operate
their procedures and what their effect has been.
The broad provision of the legislation is to enable the citizen on request to see both
the documents generated by a government department and those received by it. Once
the citizen has access he is free to publish what he finds. Broad public dissemination
therefore tends to take place through the press, rather than by the executive
government publishing the material itself. All the schemes enable the executive to
protect certain documents, notably those connected with defence, security and
international relations, as well as Cabinet papers, working papers and advice from
officials. They also allow for the protection of information concerning a citizen’s
private affairs: tax payments, criminal records and so on. Commercial secrets too may
be withheld from the public.
These procedures and the exemptions that are permitted, have allayed the anxieties of
those who feared the damaging effects of too much exposure. And they seem not to
have led to any significant impairment of the efficiency of governments. They have,
of course, involved substantial costs to government. The Americans estimated that in
the first year of operation, their running costs amounted to $37 million, quite apart
from the expenses of litigation and of the time of the officials who have had to carry
out the screening of documents.
The critical question has been that of enforcement and review, matters which are
crucial to the effectiveness of any scheme. The way countries have tackled this has
turned on whether they have a constitution modelled on our own parliamentary
democracy, or whether they have a well-developed system of administrative law, as
we have not. In the former case, the overriding principle of the accountability of
Ministers to Parliament has led to the grievances of the citizen over the withholding of
information being argued about and resolved in the political arena. In Scandinavia, by
contrast, redress lies by way of appeal to the Ombudsman and finally to an
administrative court.
It is perhaps still too early, and in any case presumptuous of an outsider, to assess how
far freedom of information by statute has led to any improvement in public
enlightenment where it has operated. The changes seem to be small and to fall rather
short of what the advocates of more open government would like to see. On the other
hand, in the area that I know best, that of economic policy-making, the publication of
the minutes of the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee has enabled the whole
world to see what criteria determine American interest rates and this knowledge has
had a significant effect on market behaviour. But the rights created in favour of the
citizen have perhaps a deeper significance. What they have done is to go some way to

6

diminish the suspicion, so dangerous to the functioning of democracy that the
executive government is unwilling to be frank, and open with the people it represents.
I have spoken so far about the duties of executive government to promote public
understanding of policy issues. But there are limits to what government itself can do,
since the main channels of public information lie outside the government’s hands. I
am referring to the press, radio and television. I should be going well beyond the
boundaries of these lectures if I were to try to define the responsibilities of the media.
Such definition would come more aptly from someone with experience of them.
But the frontier between the media and executive government does come within the
ambit of my study. The relationship between these institutions is never an easy one,
for a free press—if it is to be a bulwark of liberty—must be as vigilant of the
government as Parliament itself, and a degree of tension may be inevitable. But in
some respects misunderstanding and mistrust between them go further today than is
either necessary or desirable.
At present there is an element of abuse of each by the other and a mutual resentment
of that abuse. On the side of government, it consists of the manipulation of
information. And on the side of the media, it is a degree of unscrupulousness in the
publication of official material which has come to them in an unauthorised way.
The manipulation of the media by government chiefly takes the form of the deliberate
and covert briefing of selected elements in a way calculated to influence or condition
public opinion ahead of some announcement. In its least objectionable form, this
briefing may be the provision of privileged information on a non-attributable basis.
The effect of such briefing, if it is done skilfully, is to diminish the shock or impact of
some disagreeable policy statement. Public opinion is carefully prepared so as to
reduce the risk of an immediate adverse ‘gut’ reaction which might be prejudicial to
the policy. No one can reasonably object to this in principle. The duties of
government include the duty of leading public opinion, and the history of democracy
is punctuated with instances of great leaders preparing the public for policy changes.
But the preparation should in my view be an open one, in which Ministers freely and
explicitly discuss the issues, invite comment and meet criticism. Whatever the ethics
of accurate briefing aimed at the conditioning of public opinion, there can be no
justification for the use of misleading information. But this is not an unknown
phenomenon. If a controversial measure is to be introduced, the hostility of the initial
reaction may be tempered by inducing an expectation that something still more
unpopular and controversial is in prospect. When reality proves to be milder than
expectation, public reaction will be one of relief rather than hostility. When journalists
are misled in this way, they become highly suspicious of those who employ the
technique. If it were used systematically it would be self-defeating. But occasional
judicious and discreet use can be successful; and it is to be deplored.
I do not wish to imply that the practice is common: I do not believe it is. But the
executive government in my view would always be well advised to eschew these
practices. I doubt very much if they can be countered by a formal code, to which it
would be all too easy to pay token lip-service. The remedy lies in the ethos of
government. There must be a conscious desire not to be devious, and there can be no
better driving force for this desire than the realisation that, in the long run,
deviousness breeds distrust, cynicism and, eventually, contempt.

7

But if I have been severe in my strictures of certain informal techniques used by
government, I am just as critical of the media in respect of some of their practices. I
refer to their unhesitating use of official material which comes to them in a blatantly
unauthorised way as the result of a leak. I do not propose to go into the moral case for
leaks, except to say that in no circumstances could I defend the behaviour of officials
who, because they disagree with policy, release information which is calculated to
undermine it. Until the rules are changed, the decision to release lies with Ministers
and Ministers alone. But what of the position of the journalist who passively receives
unauthorised information? Where does his duty lie? His reply would be: to publish,
provided he is satisfied that the material is authentic. Some journalists would perhaps
acknowledge a higher duty, if the information were likely to be gravely prejudicial to
the national interest in time of war. I remember discussing with a journalist at the time
of the Falklands conflict, what his reaction would be if he obtained simultaneously a
copy of our order of battle and a copy of the government’s negotiating brief for the
annual farm price review in Brussels. He said he would suppress the former and
publish the latter.
I wonder whether he should have been so clear-cut in his views. In both cases
publication would have been damaging to the public interest even as I have defined it,
and if journalists are prepared to admit to the existence of the public interest in one
instance, I do not see how they can so easily dismiss it in another.
The leak is a blatant breach of the rules under which we play the game of government.
What I have said in this lecture puts me firmly on the side of those who would like to
see more openness. But the proper route to openness is by changing the rules, not by
breaking them. A journalist who connives at their breach is contributing to the
undermining of confidence in government no less than the perpetrator of the leak
himself. To this the journalist will reply that the pressures of competition oblige him
to use a ‘story’, however he gets it. If he does not, a competitor will and his own
publication will lose circulation. He will no doubt add that the present system does
not easily distinguish authorised briefings from unauthorised leaks. And finally, he
will argue that he is not a party to the rules whose observance I wish to see respected.
The rules of disclosure are rules devised by politicians for their own use. If a
journalist is to be asked to obey rules he should have a voice in their definition.
These arguments are cogent, but they do not dispose of the issue. Just as governments
would gain from the abandonment of devious practices against the media, so I believe
that the media should ask themselves whether they really promote democracy and
enlightenment when they seek exposure at all costs. As with government, any change
in practice would have to be a matter of internal self-discipline backed up perhaps by
the authority of the Press Council. No externally imposed code could work; and to
attempt one would be a grave interference with the liberty of the press.
The problems, then, of creating an informed and enlightened public are not easy to
resolve. All good democrats can assert their belief in the direction in which we should
be travelling. But on this journey, as on so many others where government is
concerned, there are few easy short-cuts. More important, in my view, than any
institutional changes is the need for a commitment on the part of all who work in the

8

field of government positively to want an informed public. If this is lacking, little in
the way of machinery will help.

9

