REITH LECTURES 1983: Government and the Governed
Douglas Wass
Lecture 1: United Thoughts and Counsels
TRANSMISSION: 9 November 1983 – Radio 4

Ten days after I accepted the invitation of the Governors of the BBC to give this
year’s Reith Lectures, I found myself almost by chance in the Palazzo Pubblico in
Siena, admiring two well-preserved frescoes painted by Ambrogio Lorenzetti. In one,
the very depiction of misery and punitive chastisement, the people who inhabit the
painting cringe in fear, bedraggled and impoverished. The title Bad Government. In
the other, entitled Good Government, we see prosperity, blue skies, fields rich with
crops, the citizens going about their business in the epitome of Arcadian contentment.
Why, I asked myself, did Lorenzetti entitle these murals as he did, and not, for
instance, Poverty and Prosperity? What is it about good government that he equated
with well-being? It may seem strange that the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, as
I then was, should be putting this question to himself, for the identity of good
government and prosperity has been taken for granted for a long time. Herodotus tells
us how Lycurgus, following an inspired visit to the Oracle at Delphi, in the seventh or
eighth century BC, brought good government to Sparta, reorganised the army, and
introduced the new civil offices of Ephor and Elder. Thereafter the Lacedaemonians,
as he put it, ‘soon shot up and flourished like a sturdy tree’.
In our own times, too, many of us have come to link the government with our material
prosperity. General elections are fought on what is described as the government’s
economic performance. And our disappointing post-war achievements, compared with
some of our neighbours, are laid by some people at the door of government.
Are we right, I wonder, and is history right to equate good government with
prosperity and bad government with poverty? And when we talk about government
what do we mean? Are we referring to the system, to the component parts of the
political and administrative machinery? Or do we mean the policies which
governments try to follow? Many of the attributes of a good system of government
have been recognised for centuries. The provision of a clear legal code with an
accessible judicial system; an executive free from corruption backed up by an
efficient civil military service; perhaps a consultative or legislative assembly.
You will notice that good government, so construed, does not necessarily involve
popular participation. There is nothing in Lorenzetti’s paintings to suggest that the
ordinary citizens in 14th-century Italy had any voice in the making of the laws or in
the design of the foreign policy of the prince who ruled over them. Perhaps the
thought never occurred to them that good government had anything to do with
democracy. The Athenians, however, would not have accepted this disjunction. And
nor will we. For us, as for them, the essence of good government is that it should be
democratic. Vox popuIi, vox dei.

1

As I pondered over the essential requirements of a good system of government I
found I could narrow them down to two ideas: efficiency and responsiveness. It may
seem odd to elevate efficiency to such a level of importance in considering anything
so fundamental to the human condition as government, but I am using the term in a
very broad sense. For me efficiency means that actions and decisions are taken in a
rational and systematic way; that internal conflicts and inconsistencies are brought to
the surface and resolved; that objectives are defined and optimal means employed to
secure them.
The wish that government should be both efficient and responsive can also be seen to
be a corollary of the thinking of the political philosophers who have shaped and
moulded our society since the 17th century. The rise of liberalism as a political creed
in this country stemmed essentially from the writing of John Locke, who argued even
before Adam Smith that commerce and the free competitive market provided the
citizen with the greatest opportunity to promote his own and society’s welfare. The
market was identified as an efficient mechanism for providing goods and services,
and a mechanism, too, which responded to consumer preferences. Producers who
were inefficient were displaced by those who were not. Those who failed to meet the
consumers’ wishes were likewise displaced by those who gave them satisfaction.
But there is a wide area of our society and economy where market forces do not,
indeed cannot, operate. This is the area of government itself. For good or ill, modern
government is big—not just here in Britain, but in all advanced societies. In part, this
bigness arises from the imperfections and failures of the market in certain areas—for
instance, where there is an inherent monopoly. Partly, is reflects public dissatisfaction
with the inequalities of income which are generated by the free play of market forces;
partly, too, it is an acknowledgement of the fact that some services, like defence,
simply cannot be marketed. No matter how reverently the modern descendants of
Locke and Smith treat the market, they accept that It cannot alone look after all our
needs. In this country today the goods, services and transfers which the government
commands are equivalent to more than 40 per cent of the National Product; and all
this with a government which has expressed a clear preference for relying on the
market and the private sector wherever possible.
But in taking such a large part of the provision of our daily wants out of the market
we have lost the in-built features that markets display at their best—efficiency and
responsiveness. If the government and not the market provides us with health care, a
prison service and so on, how can Detail from Lorenzetti’s ‘Good Government’: ‘the
epitome of Arcadian contentment’ we as citizens be sure it does it efficiently and in
ways we collectively approve of? There are those who argue that in a parliamentary
democracy my questions are easily answered: through the ballot box. Governments
which are inefficient or unresponsive will sooner or later meet their fate at the hands
of the electorate. But this is a simplistic view. It takes no account of the restricted
choice which is presented to voters at general elections, nor of the limited information
which is available to them when it comes to expressing a choice. Useful, and indeed
vital, as the electoral process is as a public sanction on our leaders, it is far from
sufficient to guarantee the delivery of what I have set out as the prime requirements of
government. I believe there is a pressing need’ for us as citizens to keep the daily
conduct of government business under regular review, and to ask ourselves all the

2

time whether it is being carried out in ways which satisfy us, and which give us, in the
widest sense, value for money. It is, after all, our money that is being spent.
And this brings me to the task I have set myself in these lectures. Over the next six
weeks I shall be seeking to examine how effectively, in Britain today, central
government is equipped to secure these twin objectives of efficiency and
responsiveness. I shall not be discussing the policies of governments or the objectives
they have set, important as these are to the development of our society and to its wellbeing. Nor will I be reviewing the relationship between central and local government,
even though this has now become an issue of great concern to us all and bears
critically on the question of responsiveness. I do not intend to comment either on the
system by which we elect our representatives, though this, too, is an important aspect
of popular participation in policy-making. What I shall be doing is to look at the way
our executive government is organised; at the mechanisms it uses to formulate its
policies, and the adequacy of the system by which it evaluates progress towards its
objectives. I shall be looking at the machinery through which it is called to account. I
shall ask what more ft could do to promote public debate and understanding of issues
of popular concern. And finally, I shall be considering whether our system gives the
ordinary citizen sufficient voice in the government of the country. My choice of
subject inevitably reflects my own personal experience in government.
In its most evident form, the problem of providing an efficient system of government
arises in the day-to-day execution of administrative tasks: maintaining the services of
law and order, paying welfare benefits and so on. It is here that huge sums of money
are spent: something like one-fifth of government expenditure goes on administration.
The efficiency of public administration has exercised governments for over 100 years.
Its central importance has been vigorously emphasised by the present government,
whose efforts to reduce its cost and improve its effectiveness can only be applauded.
But the search for efficiency in public administration is not a simple task. First of all,
there is the problem of measurement. Much of the public service— because it is
supplied free or substantially below cost—is not susceptible to the test of profit.
The private sector, certainly if it’s operating in a competitive environment, can gauge
its efficiency by its profit performance. Although the output of government is
something successive administrations have tried to measure, it has eluded capture
except in some small areas. So judgments about efficiency in government become
very subjective. Of course, if a given standard of service can be supplied by new
techniques at lower cost, efficiency is improved. But most reductions in costs—the
saving of staff for instance—involve some deterioration of service, some exposure to
fraud or loss, or, and this is something which isn’t always realised, some increase in
cost to the people for whom the service is provided. Putting personal taxation on a
self- assessment basis would not necessarily be an efficient step if the taxpayer had to
expend more effort making his return than the Inland Revenue did when making the
assessment for him. We would have reduced the number of civil servants, but we
would not be a more efficient society. However, difficulties like this must not stand in
the way of a continuing effort both to judge the efficacy of administration and to
improve it.
But if efficiency is an elusive concept to translate to the administration of individual
departments, how much more difficult it is at the level of government policy as a

3

whole. Even if each individual department is operating at peak efficiency, how can we
be sure that the balance of effort between departments is right? I ask this question
because the functions that government undertakes are both wide-ranging and
disparate, far more so than those performed by any other entity in our society. When a
business firm, even a conglomerate, has to decide which activities to pursue, it can
reduce its options to a common form, to the rate of return on assets for instance, and
an efficient decision becomes possible. But governments are not only undertaking
widely divergent functions, ranging, for example, from immigration control to the
provision of advice to exporters and judgments about the amount of effort to put into
each service cannot be founded on any standard or uniform basis of comparison, so
difficult is it to compare the contribution each makes to the social good.
Before I come to the conceptual difficulties which complicate the making of choices
between such unrelated and incommensurable issues as those I have instanced, it is
worth looking at the conventions which apply to collective decisions. Governments,
here as elsewhere, are organised on a functional basis, each department being headed
by a Minister whose personal responsibilities are usually defined by statute. But
overriding almost all the individual responsibilities of Ministers and departments runs
the doctrine of the collective responsibility of the Cabinet. The Cabinet, some would
say in formal terms though I would say in real terms as well, is the ultimate
embodiment of the executive government in this country. A Minister may have
statutory responsibilities peculiar to himself, but if the exercise of those
responsibilities affects his colleagues—if, for example, he exposes the whole
government to criticism and attack, or if he imposes costs on his fellow Ministers—he
must expect to submit his decision to collective endorsement.
The way issues are presented to Cabinet, indeed, the way issues are settled between
departments, is crucially affected not only by these conventions but also by the
organisation of government. An issue which is brought to Cabinet for approval or
resolution is always presented by the Minister whose business it is. If it impinges
other than tangentially on another Minister, he, too, may make a presentation to
Cabinet, supporting or opposing the case of the Minister who is principally concerned.
But the essence of any collective Cabinet discussion is that it takes place on the basis
of statements by interested parties, and they can always be relied on to do their best
by argument and presentation to secure approval for what they want to do. Where the
proposals are contested by a colleague whose departmental interests are adversely
affected, the discussion assumes an adversarial character and the Cabinet acts in what
amounts to a judicial role. But where, as so often happens, there’s no adversary, the
Cabinet simply hears the case which the Minister concerned presents, and this case is
inevitably put in terms which suit the Minister himself.
Now, it may be that in ideal circumstances the Minister will present the issue with the
same objectivity that his own officials have employed in presenting it to him. The
Cabinet will then, as a minimum, have the same information as the Minister, and its
decision can be presumed to be an efficient one. But if, for any reason, the Minister
does not present all the relevant information to his colleagues, how then can the
Cabinet be said to be taking an efficient decision?
In no area of policy-making does this problem arise more acutely than in the
management of the economy and, in particular, the Budget. The Minister who brings

4

these issues to Cabinet is, of course, the Chancellor of the Exchequer. No other
Minister has at his command the back-up of analytical support that the Chancellor
receives from his Treasury and Revenue Department officials and from the Bank of
England. How can his colleagues be assured that they’re getting the whole story and
not just the one which the Chancellor wishes them to hear? They have no independent
staff. They have indeed no direct access to the official advice which the Treasury
provides. Yet they are obliged to come to a view on the basis of what one of their
colleagues, a committed party, is telling them. And they will be expected to defend
that view in public as though it had been reached on the basis of full information.
The situation is perhaps not quite as sharply in conflict with the constitutional
proprieties as it used to be. When I joined the Treasury just after the War, and, indeed,
for many years afterwards, the Cabinet was not even invited to consider, let alone to
have a voice in the making of the Budget. Although the Prime Minister was usually
consulted beforehand, the most important aspect of economic policy was settled as a
personal matter by the Chancellor of the day, and presented to his colleagues as a fait
accompli. It was a matter of astonishment to me that successive Cabinets should have
acquiesced in this procedure, given that the doctrine of collective responsibility
obliged them to defend the Budget statement and, what is more, to live with its
consequences. Today things are somewhat better, but the Cabinet as a whole remains
at a disadvantage visà-vis the Chancellor, who keeps his powerful control of the
sources of official information and advice. It is this feature of our system which
makes it desirable that Ministers collectively should have an alternative appraisal, on
important issues at any rate, to the one provided by their colleague, a theme I shall be
returning to in next week’s lecture.
But if these are some of the problems which confront Ministers collectively in making
decisions on individual issues, how much more acute they are when they are
considering a mass of different issues, which is the task they face when they are
settling public expenditure programmes. This task is arguably the most important
function which Cabinets nowadays engage in, for although some activities of
government can still be performed costlessly, most of its business cannot be carried
out without spending a lot of money. The control and allocation of public expenditure
is therefore a matter of crucial importance to Ministers, and it must be in their and the
country’s interest that the function is carried out rationally and efficiently.
Over the past 20 years or so, governments have steadily developed techniques to help
them in the rational determination of the total claims which the public sector should
make on the economy. The Treasury makes regular forecasts of the likely trend of the
National Product and is thereby able to offer Ministers different scenarios for
taxation, personal income, inflation and so on, on the basis of different forward
projections of the total of public spending.
These scenarios go a long way towards giving Ministers collectively enough material
to make a rational choice about the division of resources between the public and the
private sectors. Whether they would prefer lower taxation to a higher level of public
services is, of course, a political decision, and different governments will have
different views on this. What is important is that Ministers should take their decision
in possession of the relevant facts and estimates, and not on the basis of blind
prejudice.

5

It is, however, when it comes to dividing the agreed total between the various,
different programmes that the concept of rationality begins to come under strain.
Decisions in this area are governed by two well-entrenched, if rather arbitrary,
principles. Number one: ‘as things have been, so, broadly, shall they remain’; and
number two: ‘he who has the muscle gets the money’. Let me explain what I mean.
Principle number one stems from the Annual Public Expenditure Survey when
departments make bids for future allocations of money on the basis of their existing
plans and programmes. The implicit assumption is that these plans are ‘right’, in the
sense that they were accepted in the past and that the only question is how rapidly or
how slowly they should develop. Principle number two manifests itself in the process
by which the individual bids for expenditure are settled. The essence of this process,
given that the aggregate of bids invariably exceeds the agreed total, is that Treasury
Ministers have to do battle with all the spending Ministers in turn. And the outcome
of each battle is determined less by rational argument than by a judgment each party
makes of the way the Cabinet would adjudicate in the event of continuing hostilities
between the parties. Sometimes the Treasury will yield, knowing that the spending
Minister has a strong political case. Sometimes it is the Minister who concedes, by not
pressing his bid, perhaps through lack of conviction in the strength of his case.
Unresolved conflicts are finally settled in full Cabinet.
Now, there are a number of criticisms which can be made of this system, but, first, a
word in its defence. The principle that programmes should develop much as they have
in the past is not simply evidence of inertia on Whitehall’s part. It is a reflection of
political reality; the reality that in a pluralist society significant shifts in policies and
programmes are liable to encounter strong opposition. And the principle of settling
differences between the Treasury and the spenders on the basis of political strength,
while crude and pragmatic, may well lead to a series of decisions which somehow
reflect rational choice. A spending Minister who lacks conviction in his programme
may be expressing the implicit view of his colleagues and his party. If he concedes
readily to the Treasury, he may be doing so not out of weakness but in recognition
that his programme does not command high priority. He may feel he can deal with the
beneficiaries of his spending programme more easily than his colleagues can with
theirs, and this, in turn, may reflect the political strength of the interest groups
affected. So, at the end of the day, the distribution may take quite a lot of account,
albeit implicitly, of political preferences.
But it is clearly not a very scientific process, and most theorists of collective decisiontaking would find it unsatisfactory. Now the system could be made a bit more rational
and efficient if it incorporated some feature for giving Ministers a ‘feel’ for the
relative value to them of different parts of their whole programme. (I mentioned
earlier the difficulty of comparing the value of the immigration service and the
provision of advice to exporters.) Let no one imagine that such comparisons are easy.
But I believe that more could be done by sophisticated cost-benefit analysis to give
Ministers a sounder basis than they have at present for exercising choice about where
to expand and where to contract government services, and to help them away from the
inefficient and indiscriminate approach, where cuts have to be made uniformly and
across the board. Another feature I would like to see would be one for regularly
evaluating the expenditure incurred on each programme against the objectives it was
designed to achieve. The world is a changing place: administrative techniques, social

6

habits, industrial performance, are not static, and government programmes should
respond flexibly to changes like this in the environment. I do not doubt that many
government departments do periodically ask themselves whether an entire programme
should be redesigned to reflect changing circumstances. But the system as it operates
today does not encourage this. It is far easier to get the Treasury and the Cabinet to
agree to unchanged programmes than to persuade them that programmes should be
modified as circumstances change, especially if the variations involve temporary
increases in expenditure. The Treasury’s proper concern to limit the total claims of the
public sector sometimes leads it to resist any increase in programmes, whatever the
benefits may be in terms of improved efficiency.
It would be possible to counter these ‘inertial’ features of the present system by
making two specific changes. The first would be to make the spending departments
think what they would do if the money available to them were drastically cut. Just as
the ordinary person or the ordinary business has, from time to time, to face a sharp
reduction in income, so departments would have to think, either of different, cheaper
ways of realising their objectives or of scrapping some objectives altogether. This
system, which is known in the jargon as zero-based budgeting, has often been
considered in the past, but it has always been ,rejected, either because the programme
managers have convinced themselves that alternative ways of carrying out their
policies were simply not available or because Ministers were not prepared to abandon
some aims altogether. These are understandable reactions, but the arguments against
change do not really convince me. I would therefore like to see zero-based budgeting
tried out, in the first place on a selective basis, to see whether it is as unworkable as
the spenders have always argued in the past.
The second change, which would have something like the same effect, would be to
reinstate a regime which Mr Heath’s administration introduced over ten years ago, the
regime of policy analysis and review, ‘PAR’ for short. This system required Whitehall
to comb over its programmes and find out whether they were working in the way they
had been intended to. Take transport, for instance. The idea of ‘PAR’ would be to
mount a searching review of the government’s various policies towards public and
private transport, to see whether they were contributing to the creation of a coherent
system of roads, railways, canals, airports and so on, which matched the users’
requirements. The instruments used to bring about these policy aims, for instance the
taxation of cars, investment- spending on the railways, the licensing of civil air routes
and so on, would be examined to see how effective they were, and if the policies were
not producing the desired results, they would become candidates for change. The
concept was admirable, but in practice it did not come off. Why not? In part, the
answer is that each ‘PAR’ imposed a heavy burden on officials and many of the
reviews led to no perceptible change in policy. The effort seemed pointless. The cost
of each radical review was the neglect of some part of the continuing job of
administration. But another reason why the system fell into disuse was that many
departments chose to offer relatively unimportant programmes for analysis and kept
their major policies out of the area of review.
The experience of the 1970s should give anyone pause before recommending the
reinstatement of ‘PAR’. But I believe its demise was not due to any inherent flaw or
defect—and a new generation of officials, and a firm commitment by Ministers, could
make it a success. The effort it would involve could be amply repaid by the

7

substantial rewards to be gained in even a few programmes. The Treasury has made a
start in this direction by calling for departmental reviews at the conclusion of each
annual expenditure survey. This needs to be given strong ministerial support.
This brings me to my last point, and it is one which inevitably arises from the concept
of review and the reappraisal of policy. To what extent should governments be
prepared to adapt policy to changing circumstances? A policy which governments
cling to long after the evidence has shown it is not doing what it was meant to do is
plainly inefficient. All governments face this problem from time to time, because
policies rarely produce their desired results quickly. Steadfastness of policy in the
face of adversity and setbacks is a desirable quality in governments as it is in other
organisations. Plutarch wrote wisely when he said that ‘to be turned from one’s course
by men’s opinions, by blame and by misinterpretation, shows a man unfit to hold
office’. But steadfastness or inflexibility in the teeth of clear evidence of policy failure
is another matter. The word ‘pragmatism’ has acquired a certain stigma: it is
interpreted to mean a willingness to change course at the first reverse. But
governments must be pragmatic. In the science of politics, we know very little a priori
about the likely results of a radical policy development. Given this ignorance, it is
surely right that policies should be rigorously evaluated and their effects set against
their objectives. Dependent as they are for political support on a public perception of
their competence and resolve, it may be hard for governments to admit that they have
been wrong. But without the strength of moral purpose to make such an admission,
they may in the long run expose themselves and the country to risks and dangers
which far exceed the costs of a policy change.
I find it difficult to believe that, starkly as he saw the contrast between good and bad
government, Lorenzetti would not have expected his benign prince to apply his ruling
hand in a flexible and responsive way.

8

