REITH LECTURES 1984: Minds, Brains and Science
John Searle
Lecture 1: A Froth on Reality
TRANSMISSION: 7 November 1984 – Radio 4

For thousands of years people have been trying to understand their relationship to I
the rest of the universe. For a variety of reasons many philosophers today are reluctant
to tackle such big problems. None the less, the problems remain, and in these lectures
I’m going to attack some of them.
At the moment, the biggest problem is this: we have a certain commonsense picture of
ourselves as human beings which is very hard to square with our overall ‘scientific’
conception of the physical world. We think of ourselves as conscious, free, mindful,
rational agents in a world that science tells us consist entirely of mindless,
meaningless physical particles. Now, how can we square these two conceptions?
How, for example, can it be both the case that the world contains nothing but
unconscious physical particles, and yet that it also contains consciousness? How can a
mechanical universe contain intentionalistic human beings - human beings that can
represent the world to themselves? How can an essentially meaningless world contain
meanings?
Such problems also spill over into other, more contemporary sounding issues: how
shall we interpret recent work in computer science and artificial intelligence - work
aimed at making intelligent machines? Specifically does the digital computer at last
give us the right picture of the human mind? And why is it that the social sciences in
general have not given us insights into ourselves comparable to those that the natural
sciences have given us into the rest of nature?
In this first lecture, I want to plunge right in to what many philosophers think of as the
hardest problem of all: what’s the relation of our minds to the rest of the universe?
This, I am sure you will recognise, is the traditional mind-body or mind-brain
problem. In its contemporary version it usually takes the form: how does the mind
relate to the brain?
I believe that the mind-body problem has a rather simple solution, one that’s
consistent both with what we know about neurophysiology and with our
commonsense conception of the nature of our mental states—pains, beliefs, desires
and so on. But before presenting that solution, I want to ask why does the mind-body
problem seem so intractable. Why do we still have in philosophy and psychology,
after all these centuries, a ‘mind-body problem’ in a way that we do not have, say, a
‘digestion- stomach problem’? Why does the mind seem more mysterious to us than
other biological phenomena?
I’m convinced that pan of the difficulty is that we persist in talking about a 20thCentury problem in an outmoded 17th-century vocabulary. When I was an
undergraduate, I remember being dissatisfied with the choices that were apparently

1

available in the philosophy of mind: you could be either a monist or a dualist. If you
were a monist, you could be either a materialist or an idealist. If a materialist, you
could be either a behaviourist or a physicalist. And so on. One of my aims in what
follows is to try to break out of these tired categories.
But vocabulary apart there is still a problem or family of problems. Since Descartes,
the mind-body problem has taken the following form: how can we account for the
relationships between two apparently completely different kinds of things? On the one
hand, there are mental things, such as our thoughts and feelings; we think of them as
subjective, conscious and immaterial. On the other hand, there are physical things;
and we think of them as having mass, as extended in space, and as causally interacting
with other physical things. Most attempted solutions to the mind-body problem wind
up by denying the existence of or in some way downgrading the status of, one or the
other of these types of things. Given the successes of the physical sciences, it’s not
surprising that in our stage of intellectual development the temptation is to downgrade
the status of mental entities. Most of the recently fashionable materialist conceptions
of the mind—such as behaviourism, functionalism and physicalism—end up by
denying implicitly or explicitly, that there are any such things as minds as we
ordinarily think of them. That is, they deny that we really do intrinsically have
subjective, conscious, mental states that are as real as anything else in the universe.
Now, why do they do that? Why is it that so many theorists end up by denying the
intrinsically mental character of mental phenomena? If we can answer that question, I
believe that we will understand why the mind-body problem has seemed so intractable
for so long.
There are four features of mental phenomena which have made them seem impossible
to fit into our ‘scientific’ conception of the world as made up of material things. It is
these four features that have made the mind-body problem really difficult.
The first and most important of these features is consciousness. I, at the moment of
writing this, and you, at the moment of reading it are both conscious. It’s just a plain
fact about the world that it contains such conscious mental states and events, but it’s
hard to see how mere physical systems could have consciousness. How could such a
thing occur? How, for example, could this grey and white gook inside my skull be
conscious?
I think the existence of consciousness ought to seem amazing to us. Consciousness is
the central fact of specifically human existence, because without it all of the other
specifically human aspects of our existence—such as language, love, humour and so
on—would be impossible. I believe it is, by the way, something of a scandal that
contemporary discussions in philosophy and psychology have so little of interest to
tell us about consciousness.
The second intractable feature of the mind is what philosophers and psychologists call
Intentionality’, the feature by which our mental states are directed at or about, or refer
to, or are of objects and states of affairs, in the world other than themselves.
‘Intentionality’, by the way, doesn’t just refer to intentions, hut also to beliefs, desires,
hopes, fears, love, hate, lust, disgust, shame, pride, irritation, amusement, and all of
those menial states (whether conscious or unconscious) that refer to, or are about, the
world apart from the mind. Now, the question about intentionality is much like the
question about consciousness. How can this stuff inside my head be about anything?

2

How can it refer to anything? After all, the stuff in the skull consists of ‘atoms in the
void’, just as all of the rest of material reality consists of atoms in the void. How, to
put it crudely, can atoms in the void represent anything?
The third feature of the mind that seems difficult to accommodate within a scientific
conception of reality is the subjectivity of mental states. This subjectivity is marked
by such facts as that I can feel my pains, and you can’t. I see the world from my point
of view; you see it from your point of view. I am aware of myself and my internal
mental states, as quite distinct from the selves and mental states of other people. Since
the 17th century we’ve come to think of reality as something which must be equally
accessible to all competent observers—that is, we think it must be objective. Now,
how are we to accommodate the reality of subjective mental phenomena with the
scientific conception of reality as totally objective?
Finally, there is a fourth problem, the problem of mental causation. We all suppose, as
part of common sense, that our thoughts and feelings make a difference to the way we
behave, that they actually have some causal effect on the physical world. I decide, for
example, to raise my arm and—lo and behold—my arm goes up. But if our thoughts
and feelings are truly mental, how can they affect anything physical? Are we
supposed to think that our thoughts and feelings can somehow produce chemical
effects on our brains and the rest of our nervous system? Do we suppose that the
thought can wrap itself around the axons and the dendrites or that it can sneak inside
the cell wall and attack the cell nucleus? How could such things possibly occur?
But unless some such connection takes place between the mind and the brain, aren’t
we left with the view that the mind doesn’t matter, that it is as unimportant causally as
the froth on the wave is to the movement of the wave? If the froth were conscious, it
might think to itself, ‘What a tough job it is pulling these waves up on the beach and
then pulling them out again, all day long!’ But we know that the froth doesn’t make
any important difference. Now why do we suppose our mental life is any more
important than a froth on the wave of physical reality?
These four features then, consciousness, intentionality, subjectivity and mental
causation, are what make the mind-body problem seem so difficult. Yet, I wish to say,
they are all real features of our mental lives. Not every mental state has all of them.
But any satisfactory account of the mind and of mind-body relations must take
account of all four features if your theory ends up by denying any one of them; you
know you must have made a mistake somewhere.
The first thesis I want to advance towards ‘solving the mind-body problem’ is this:
mental phenomena, all mental phenomena, whether conscious or unconscious, visual
or auditory, pains, tickles, itches, thoughts, indeed all of our mental life, are caused by
processes going on in the brain. For example, let’s consider pains. Of course, anything
we say now may seem wonderfully quaint in a generation or so as our knowledge of
how the brain works increases. None the less, the form of the explanation can remain
valid even though the details are altered.
On current views, pain signals are transmitted from sensory nerve endings to the
spinal cord by at least two types of fibres-Delta A fibres, which are specialised for
prickling sensations, and C fibres, which are specialised for burning and aching

3

sensations. As the signals go up the spine, they enter the brain by two separate
pathways—the prickling-pain pathway and the burning-pain pathway. Both pathways
go through the thalamus, but the prickling-pain pathway is more localised afterwards
in the somato-sensory cortex, whereas the burning- pain pathway transmits signals,
not only upwards into the cortex, but also laterally into the hypothalamus and other
regions at the base of the brain.
Now, for the purposes of this discussion, the point we need to hammer home is this:
our sensations of pains are caused by a series of events that begin at free nerve
endings and end in the thalamus and in other regions of the brain. And, indeed, as far
as the actual sensations are concerned, the events inside the central nervous system
are quite sufficient to cause pains—as we know both from the phantom- limb pains
felt by amputees and the pains caused by artificially stimulating relevant portions of
the brain. And I want to suggest that what is true of pain is true of mental phenomena
generally. To put it crudely, and counting all of the central nervous system as part of
the brain for our present discussion, everything that matters for our mental life, all of
our thoughts and feelings, are caused by processes inside the brain.
The crucial step is the one that goes on inside the head, not the external or peripheral
stimulus. And the argument for this is simple. If the events outside the central nervous
system occurred, but nothing happened in the brain, there would be no mental events.
But if the right things happened in the brain, the mental events would occur even if
there was no outside stimulus.
But if pains and other mental phenomena are caused by processes in the brain, one
wants to know: well, what are pains? What are they really? In the case of pains, the
obvious answer is that they are unpleasant sorts of sensations. But that answer leaves
us unsatisfied because it doesn’t tell us how pains fit into our overall conception of
the world.
Once again, I think the answer to the question is obvious, but it will take some
spelling out. To our first claim—pains and other mental phenomena are caused by
brain processes—we need to add a second claim: pains and other mental phenomena
are features of the brain (and perhaps the rest of the central nervous system).
Now, one of the primary aims of this lecture is to show how both of these
propositions can be true together. How can it be both the case that brains cause minds
and yet minds just are features of brains? If mental and physical phenomena have
cause and effect relationships, how can one be a feature of the other? Wouldn’t that
imply that the mind caused itself—the dreaded doctrine of causa sui? But at the
bottom of our puzzlement is a misunderstanding of causation. It’s tempting to think
that whenever A causes B, there must be two discrete events; one identified as the
cause, the other identified as the effect; that all causation functions in the same way as
billiard balls hitting each other. This crude model of the causal relationships between
the brain and the mind inclines us to accept some kind of dualism; that events in one
material realm, the ‘physical’, cause events in another insubstantial realm, the
‘mental’. But that seems to me a mistake. And the way to remove the mistake is to get
a more sophisticated concept of causation. To do this, I want to turn away from the
relations between mind and brain for a moment to observe some other sorts of causal
relationships in nature.

4

A common distinction in physics is between micro and macro properties of systemsthe small and large scales. Consider, for example, the desk at which I am now sitting,
or the glass of water in front of me. Each object is composed of micro-particles. The
micro-particles have features at the level of molecules and atoms as well as at the
deeper level of subatomic particles. But each object also has certain properties such as
the solidity of the table, the liquidity of the water, and the transparency of the glass,
which are surface or global properties of the physical systems. Many such surface or
global properties can be causally explained by the behaviour of elements at the micro
level. For example, the solidity of the table in front of me is explained by the lattice
structure occupied by the molecules of which the table is composed. Similarly, the
liquidity of the water is explained by the nature of the interactions between H2O
molecules.
It seems to me that these rather banal examples provide a perfectly ordinary model for
explaining the puzzling relationships between the mind and the brain. In the case of
liquidity, solidity, and transparency, we have no difficulty at all in saying that the
surface features are caused by the behaviour of elements at the micro-level. At the
same time we accept that the surface phenomena just are features of the systems in
question. The clearest way I know of stating this point is to say that the surface
feature is caused by the behaviour of micro- elements, and at the same time is realised
in the system that’s made up of the micro- elements. There is, indeed, a cause and
effect relationship, but at the same lime the surface features are just higher level
features of the very system whose behaviour at the micro-level causes them.
Now, in objecting to this one might say that liquidity, solidity, and so on, are really
identical with features of the micro-structure. So, for example, we might just define
solidity as the lattice structure of the molecular arrangement. Well, this point seems to
me correct but not really an objection to the analysis that I am proposing. It is a
characteristic of the progress of science that an expression that’s originally defined in
terms of surface features, features accessible to the senses, is subsequently defined in
terms of the micro-structure that causes the surface features. Thus, to take the
example of solidity, the table in front of me is solid in the ordinary sense that it’s
rigid, it resists pressure, it supports books, it’s not easily penetrable by most other
objects such as other tables, and so on. Such is the commonsense notion of solidity.
And in a scientific vein, one can then define solidity as whatever micro-structure
causes these gross observable features. One can then say either that solidity just is the
lattice structure of the system of molecules, and that solidity so defined causes, for
example, resistance to touch and pressure. Or one can say that solidity consists of
such higher level things as rigidity and resistance to touch and pressure and is caused
by the behaviour of elements at the micro-level.
If we apply these lessons to the study of the mind, it seems to me there’s no difficulty
in accounting for the relations of the mind to the brain in terms of the brain’s
functioning to cause mental states. Just as the liquidity of the water is caused by the
behaviour of elements at the micro-level, and yet at the same time is a feature realised
in the system of micro-elements, so, in exactly that sense of ‘caused by’ and ‘realised
in’, mental phenomena are caused by processes going on in the brain at the neuronal
or modular level, and they are realised in the very system that consists of neurons.
And just as we need the micro-macro distinction for any physical system, for the same
reasons we need the micro-macro distinction for the brain. Though we can say of a

5

system of particles that it’s ten degrees centigrade, or solid or liquid, we can’t say of
any given particle that this particle is solid, this particle is liquid, this particle is ten
degrees centigrade. I can’t reach into this glass, pull out a molecule and say this one’s
wet.
In exactly the same way, as far as we know anything at all about it, though we can say
of a particular brain, this brain is conscious or this brain is experiencing thirst or pain,
we cannot say of any particular neuron, this neuron is in pain, this neuron is
experiencing thirst. To repeat the point, though there are enormous empirical
mysteries about how the brain works in detail, there are no logical or philosophical or
metaphysical obstacles to accounting for the relation between the mind and the brain
in terms that are completely familiar to us from the rest of nature.
Well, let’s now return to the four problems that seem to face any attempt to solve the
mind-brain problem.
First, how is consciousness possible?
The best way to show bow something is possible is to show how it actually exists.
We’ve already given a sketch of how pains are actually caused by neuro-physiological
processes going on in the thalamus and the sensory cortex. Why is it, then, that many
people feel dissatisfied with this sort of an answer? I think that by pursuing an
analogy with an earlier problem in the history of science we can dispel this sense of
puzzlement. For a long time many biologists and philosophers thought it was
impossible, in principle, to account for the existence of life on purely biological
grounds. They thought that in addition to the biological processes some other element
must be necessary. Some élan vital had to be postulated in order to lend life to what
was otherwise just dead and inert matter. It’s hard today to realise how intense the
dispute was between vitalists and mechanists even a generation ago, but today these
issues are no longer taken seriously. Why not? I think it’s not so much because
mechanism won and vitalism lost, but because we’ve come to understand better the
biological character of the processes that are characteristic of living organisms.
Once we understand how the features have a biological explanation, it no longer
seems mysterious to us that matter should be alive. And I suggest that exactly similar
considerations should apply to our discussions of consciousness. It should seem no
more mysterious, in principle, that this hunk of matter, this grey and white, oatmealtextured substance of the brain, should be conscious than it seems to us mysterious
that this other hunk of matter, this collection of nucleo-protein molecules stuck on to a
calcium frame, should be alive. The way, in short, to dispel the mystery is to
understand the processes. We don’t yet fully understand the processes, but we
understand that there are certain specific electrochemical activities going on among
neurons or neuron modules and perhaps other features of the brain, and that these
processes cause consciousness.
Our second problem: how can atoms in the void have intentionality? How can they be
about something?
As with our first question, the best way to show how something is possible is to show
how it actually exists. Consider thirst. As far as we know anything about it, at least

6

certain kinds of thirst are caused in the hypothalamus by sequences of nerve firings.
These firings are in turn caused by the action of angiotensin in the hypothalamus, and
angiotensin, in turn, is synthesised by renin, which is secreted by the kidneys. Thirst,
at least of these kinds, is caused by a series of events in the central nervous system,
principally the hypothalamus and is realised in the hypothalamus. Now, to be thirsty
is to have, among other things, the desire to drink. Thirst is therefore an intentional
state: it has content, its content determines under what conditions it’s satisfied, and it
has all the rest of the features that are common to intentional states.
As with the ‘mysteries’ of life and consciousness, the way to master the mystery of
intentionality is to describe in as much detail as we can how the phenomena are
caused by biological processes while being at the same time realised in biological
systems. Visual and auditory experiences, tactile sensations, hunger, thirst and sexual
desire, are all caused by brain processes and realised in the structure of the brain, and
they are all intentional phenomena.
Third, how do we accommodate the subjectivity of mental states within an objective
conception of the real world?
It seems to me a mistake to suppose that the definition of reality should exclude
subjectivity. If a scientific account of the world attempts to describe how things are,
then one of the features of the account will be the subjectivity of mental states, since it
is just a plain fact about biological evolution that it has produced certain sorts of
biological systems, namely human and certain animal brains that have subjective
features. My present state of consciousness is a feature of my brain, but its conscious
aspects are accessible to me in a way that they are not accessible to you. And your
present state of consciousness is a feature of your brain, and its conscious aspects are
accessible to you in a way that they are not accessible to me. Thus, the existence of
subjectivity is an objective fact of biology.
It’s a persistent mistake to try to define ‘science’ in terms of certain features of
existing scientific theories. But once this provincialism is perceived to be the
prejudice it is, then any domain of facts is subject to systematic investigation. If, for
example, God existed, then that tact would be a fact like any other. I don’t know
whether God exists, but I have no doubt at all that subjective mental states exist,
because I’m now in one and so are you. If the fact of subjectivity runs counter to a
certain definition of the word ‘science’, then it’s the definition and not the fact that we
will have to abandon.
Fourth, the problem of mental causation for our present purpose is to explain how
mental events can cause physical events. How, for example, could anything as
‘weightless’, as ‘gaseous’, as ‘ethereal’, as a thought give rise to an action?
The answer is that thoughts are not weightless, gaseous and ethereal. When you have
a thought, brain activity is actually going on. Brain activity causes bodily movements
by physiological processes. Now, because mental states are features of the brain, they
have two levels of description - a higher level in mental terms, and a lower level in
physiological terms. The very same causal powers of the system can be described at
either level.

7

Once again, we can use an analogy from physics to illustrate these relationships.
Consider hammering a nail with a hammer. Both hammer and nail have a certain kind
of solidity. Hammers made of cotton wool or butter will be quite useless, and
hammers made of water or steam are not hammers at all. Solidity is a real causal
property of the hammer. But the solidity itself is caused by the behaviour of particles
at the micro-level and is realised in the system of micro-elements.
The existence of two causally real levels of description in the brain is exactly
analogous to the existence of two causally real levels of description of the hammer.
Consciousness, for example, is a real property of the brain that can cause things to
happen. My conscious attempt to perform an action such as raising my arm causes the
movement of the arm. At the higher level of description, the intention to raise my arm
causes the movement of the arm. At the lower level of description, a series of neuron
firings starts a chain of events that results in the contraction of the muscles. As with
the case of hammering a nail, the same sequence of events has two levels of
description. Both of them are causally real, and the higher level causal features are
both caused by and realised in the structure of the lower level elements.
To summarise: in my view, the mind and the body interact, but they are not two
different things since mental phenomena arc features of the brain. One way to
characterise this solution to the mind-body problem is to see it as an assertion of both
physicalism and mentalism. Suppose we define ‘naive physicalism’ to be the view
that all that exists in the world are physical particles with their properties and
relations. The power of the physical model of reality is so great that it’s hard to see
how we can seriously challenge naive physicalism. And now let’s define ‘naive
mentalism’ to be the view that mental phenomena really exist. There really are mental
states; some of them are conscious; many have intentionality; they all have
subjectivity; and many of them function causally in determining physical events in the
world. The thesis of this first Reith lecture can now be stated quite simply. Naive
mentalism and naive physicalism are perfectly consistent with each other. Indeed, as
far as we know anything about how the world works, they’re not only consistent,
they’re both true.

8

