REITH LECTURES 1984: Minds, Brains and Science
John Searle
Lecture 5: A Changing Reality
TRANSMISSION: 5 December 1984 – Radio 4

In this lecture I want to discuss one of the most vexing intellectual problems of the
present era: why have the methods of the natural sciences not given us the kind of
payoff in the study of human behaviour that they have in subjects like physics and
chemistry? And what sort of ‘social’ or ‘behavioural’ sciences can we reasonably
expect anyhow? I’m going to suggest that there are certain radical differences
between human behaviour and the phenomena studied in the natural sciences. And
P11 argue that these differences account both for the failures and the successes that
the methods of the natural sciences have had in the human sciences.
At the beginning I want to call your attention to art important difference between the
form of commonsense explanations of human behaviour and the standard form of
scientific explanations. According to the standard theory of scientific explanation,
explaining a phenomenon consists in showing how its occurrence follows from
certain scientific laws. These laws are universal generalisations about how things
happen. For example, if you are given a statement of the relevant laws describing the
behaviour of a falling body, and you know where it started from, you can actually
deduce what will happen to it. Similarly, if you want to explain a law, you can deduce
the law from some higher-level law. On this account explanation and prediction are
perfectly symmetrical. You predict by deducing what will happen; you explain by
deducing what has happened.
Now, whatever merit this type of explanation may have in the natural sciences, one of
the things I want to emphasise in this lecture is that it is quite worthless to us in
explaining human behaviour. And this is not because we lack laws for explaining
individual examples of human behaviour, but rather it’s because even if we had such
laws, they would still be useless to us. And I think I can easily get you to see that by
asking you to imagine what it would be like if we actually had a ‘law’, that is, a
universal generalisation concerning some aspect of behaviour.
Suppose that in the last election you voted for the Tories, and suppose that you voted
for the Tories because you thought they would do more to solve the problem of
inflation than any of the other parties. Now, let’s suppose that’s just a plain tact about
why you voted for the Tories, as it is an equally plain fact you did vote for the Tories.
Suppose, furthermore, that some political sociologists come up with an absolutely
exceptionless universal generalisation about people who exactly fit your description—
your socio-economic status, your income level, your education, your other interests,
and so on.
Suppose this absolutely exceptionless generalisation is to the effect that people like
you invariably vote for the Tories. Now, I want to ask: which explains why you voted

1

for the Tories? Is it the reason you sincerely accept? Or is it the universal
generalisation?
I believe we would never accept the generalisation as the explanation of our own
behaviour. The generalisation states a regularity. And knowledge of such a regularity
may be useful for prediction, but it doesn’t explain anything about individual cases of
human behaviour. If a generalisation were found, it itself would require explanation of
the son we were after in the first place. And where human behaviour is concerned, the
sort of explanation we normally seek is one that specifies the mental states—the
beliefs, fears, hopes, desires, and so on—that function causally in the production of
the behaviour.
Well, let’s return to our original question: why do we not seem to have laws of social
sciences in the sense that we have laws of the natural sciences? Now, there are several
standard answers to that question. Some philosophers point out that we don’t have a
science of behaviour for the same reason that we don’t have a science of furniture. We
couldn’t have such a science because there aren’t any physical features that all
furniture—chairs, tables, rugs, and other items—have in common that would enable
them to fall under a common set of laws of furniture. And besides, they argue, we
don’t really need such a science because anything we want to explain—for example,
why are wooden tables solid, or why does iron lawn furniture rust?—can already be
explained by existing sciences. Similarly, there aren’t any features that all human
behaviours have in common. And besides, particular things we wish to explain can be
explained by physics, and physiology, and all the rest of the existing sciences.
In a related argument some philosophers point out that perhaps our concepts for
describing ourselves and other human beings don’t match the concepts of such basic
sciences as physics and chemistry in the right way. Perhaps, they suggest, human
science is like a science of the weather. We have a science of the weather,
meteorology, but it’s not a strict science because the things that interest us about the
weather don’t match the natural categories we have for physics. So weather concepts
such as ‘bright spots over the Midlands’ or ‘partly cloudy in London’ are not
systematically related to the concepts of physics- A powerful expression of this sort of
view is in Jerry Fodor’s work. He suggests that special sciences like geology or
meteorology are about features of the world that can be realised in physics in a variety
of ways and that this loose connection between the social sciences and the more basic
science of physics is also characteristic of the social sciences.
Just as mountains and storms can be realised in different sorts of microphysical
structures, so money, for example, can be physically realised as gold, or silver, or
printed paper. And such disjunctive connections between the higher order phenomena
and the lower order do indeed allow us to have rich sciences, but they do not allow for
strict laws, because the form of the loose connections will permit of laws that have
exceptions.
Another argument for the view that we cannot have strict laws connecting the mental
and the physical is in Donald Davidson’s claim that the concepts of rationality,
consistency and coherence are partly constitutive of our notion of mental phenomena;
and these notions simply don’t relate systematically to the notions of physics. As
Davidson says, they have no ‘echo’ in physics. But a difficulty with this view is that

2

there are lots of sciences which contain constitutive notions that similarly have no
echo in physics but are none the less pretty solid sciences. Biology, for example,
requires the concept of organism, and ‘organism’ has no echo in physics, but biology
does not thereby cease to be a hard science.
Another view, widely held, is that the complex interrelations of our mental states
prevent us from ever getting a systematic set of laws connecting them to
neurophysiological states. But, once again, this argument is inconclusive. Suppose,
for example, that Noam Chomsky is right in thinking that each of us ha-s a complex
set of rules of universal grammar programmed into our brains at birth. Well, there’s
nothing about the complexity or interdependence of the rules of universal grammar
that prevents them from being systematically realised in the neurophysiology of the
brain. Interdependence and complexity by themselves are not a sufficient argument
against the possibility of strict psycho-physical laws.
I find all of these accounts suggestive, but do not believe that they adequately capture
the really radical differences between the mental and the physical sciences. The
relation between sociology and economics on the one hand, and physics on the other,
is really quite unlike the relation, for example, of meteorology, geology and biology
and other special sciences to physics, and we need to try to state exactly how. Now,
ideally I’d like to be able to give you a step-by-step argument to show the limitations
on the possibilities of strict social sciences and yet at the same time show the real
nature and power of these disciplines. I think we need to abandon once and for all the
idea that the social sciences are like physics before Newton and that what we are
waiting for is a set of Newtonian laws of the human mind.
Well, first one might ask: what exactly is the problem supposed to be? One might say.
‘Surely social and psychological phenomena are as real as anything else. So why can’t
there be laws of their behaviour? Why should there be laws of the behaviour of
molecules but not laws of the behaviour of societies?’
One way to disprove a thesis is to imagine that it’s true and then show how that
supposition is somehow absurd. So let’s suppose that we actually had laws of society
and laws of history that would enable us to predict when there would be wars and
revolutions.
The real problem is this: whatever else wars and revolutions are, they involve Lots of
molecule movements. But that has the consequence that any strict law about wars and
revolutions would have to match perfectly with the laws about molecule movements.
In order for a revolution to start on such and such a day, the relevant molecules would
have to be blowing in the right direction.
But if that’s so, then the laws that predict the revolution will have to make the same
predictions at the level of revolutions and their participants that the laws of molecule
movements make at the level of the physical particles. So now our original question
can be reformulated: why can’t the laws at the higher level, the level of revolutions,
match perfectly with the laws at the lower level, the level of particles?

3

Well, to see why they can’t, let’s examine some cases where there really is a perfect
match between the higher order laws and the lower order laws, and then we can see
how these cases differ from the social cases.
One of the all-time successes in reducing the laws at one level to those of a lower
level is the reduction of the gas laws—Boyle’s law and Charles’s law—to the laws of
statistical mechanics. How does the reduction work?
The gas laws concern the relations between pressure, temperature and volume of
gases. They predict, for example, that if you increase the temperature of a gas in a
cylinder, you will increase the pressure on the walls of the cylinder. The laws of
statistical mechanics concern the behaviour of masses of small particles. They predict,
for example, that if you increase the rate of movement of the particles in a gas, more
of the particles will hit the walls of the cylinder and will hit them harder. Now, the
reason you get a perfect match between these two sets of laws is that the explanation
of temperature, pressure and volume can be given entirely in terms of the behaviour
of the particles. Increasing the temperature of the gas increases the velocity of the
particles, and increasing the number and velocity of the particles hitting the cylinder
walls increases the pressure. So it follows that an increase in temperature will produce
an increase in pressure.
Now, suppose for the sake of argument that it wasn’t like that. Suppose there was no
explanation of pressure and temperature in terms of the behaviour of more
fundamental particles. Then any laws at the level of pressure and temperature would
be simply miraculous. Because it would be miraculous that the way that pressure and
temperature were going on coincided exactly with the way that the particles were
going on; if there was no systematic relation between the behaviour of the system at
the level of pressure and temperature, and the behaviour of the system at the level of
the particles. This example is a very simple case. So let’s take a slightly more
complex example.
It is a law of ‘nutrition science’ that caloric intake equals caloric output, plus or minus
fat deposit. That’s not a very fancy law perhaps, but it’s pretty realistic none the less.
It has the consequence known to most of us that if you eat a lot and don’t exercise
enough, you get fat. Now, this law, unlike the gas laws, is not grounded in any simple
way in the behaviour of the particles. The grounding isn’t simple— because, for
example, there’s a rather complex series of processes by which food is converted into
fat deposits in living organisms. None the less, there’s still a grounding—however
complex—of this law in terms of the behaviour of more fundamental particles. Other
things being equal, when you eat a lot, the molecules will be blowing in exactly the
right direction to make you fat.
Well, now, given these examples, we can argue further towards the conclusion that
there will be no laws of wars and revolutions in a way that there are laws of gases and
of nutrition. The phenomena in the world that we pick out with concepts like war and
revolution, marriage, money and property, are not grounded systematically in the
behaviour of elements at the more basic level in a way that the phenomena that we
pick out with concepts like fat deposit and pressure are grounded systematically in the
behaviour of elements at the more basic level.

4

But now the question arises: if the social and psychological phenomena aren’t
grounded in this way, why aren’t they? Why couldn’t they be? Granted that they are
not grounded, why not? That is, wars and revolutions, like everything else, consist of
molecule movements. So, why can’t such social phenomena as wars and revolutions
be systematically related to molecule movements in the same way that the relations
between caloric inputs and fat deposits are systematic?
Well, to see why this can’t be so we have to ask what features social phenomena have
that enable us to bind them into categories. What are the fundamental principles on
which we categorise psychological and social phenomena? One crucial feature is this:
for a large number of social and psychological phenomena the concept that names the
phenomenon is itself a constituent of the phenomenon. So in order for something to
count as a marriage ceremony or a trade union, or property or money or even a war or
revolution, people involved in these activities have to have certain appropriate
thoughts. And in general they have to think, that’s what it is. So, for example, in order
to get married or buy property, you and other people have to think that that’s what
you are doing.
This feature is crucial to social phenomena. But there’s nothing like it in the
biological and physical sciences. Something can be a tree or a plant, or some person
can have tuberculosis even if no one thinks, here’s a tree or a plant or this is a case of
tuberculosis, and even if no one thinks about it at all.
But many of the terms that describe social phenomena have to enter into their very
constitution. And this has the further result that such terms have a peculiar kind of
self-referentiality. The concept ‘money’ refers to whatever people use as and think of
as money. ‘Promise’ refers to whatever people intend as and regard as promises. I’m
not saying that in order to have the institution of money people have to have that very
word or some exact synonym in their vocabulary. Rather, they must have certain
thoughts and attitudes about something in order that it count as money, and these
thoughts and attitudes are part of the very definition of money.
Now, there’s another crucial consequence of this feature, The defining principles of
such social phenomena set no physical limits whatever on what can count as the
physical realisation of them. And this means that there can’t be any systematic
connections between the physical and the social or mental properties of the
phenomenon. The social features in question are determined in part by the attitudes
we take towards them. The attitudes we take towards them are not constrained by the
physical features of the phenomena in question. Therefore, there can’t be any
matching of the mental level and the level of the physics of the sort that would be
necessary to make strict laws of the social sciences possible.
So the main step in the argument for a radical discontinuity between the social
sciences and the natural sciences depends on the mental character of social
phenomena. And it’s this feature which all those analogies I mentioned earlier—that
is, between meteorology, biology and geology—neglect. The radical discontinuity
between the social disciplines on the one hand and the natural sciences on the other
derives from the role of the mind in the social disciplines.

5

Consider Fodor’s claim that social laws will have exceptions, since the phenomena at
the social level map loosely, or disjunctively, on to the physical phenomena. Once
again, this doesn’t account for the radical discontinuities I’ve been calling attention to.
Even if this sort of disjunction had been true up to a certain point, it’s always open to
the next person to add to it in indefinitely many ways.
Suppose money had always taken a limited range of physical forms—gold, silver and
printed paper, for example. Still, it’s open to the next person or society to treat
something else as money. And indeed the physical realisation doesn’t matter to the
properties of money as long as the physical realisation enables the stuff to be used as a
medium of exchange.
‘Well,’ somebody might object to me, ‘in order to have a rigorous social science we
don’t need a strict match between properties of things in the world; all we need is a
strict match between the psychological properties and features of the brain. The real
grounding of economics and sociology in the physical world is not in the properties of
objects we find around us, it is in the physical properties of the brain. So even if
thinking that something is money is essential to its being money, still thinking that it
is money may well be, and indeed on your account is, a process in the brain. So, in
order to show that there can’t be any strict laws of social sciences you have to show
that there can’t he any strict correlations between mental states and brain state types,
and you haven’t shown that.’
To see why there can’t be such correlations, let’s examine some areas where it seems
likely that we will get a strict neuropsychology: that is, strict laws correlating mental
phenomena and neurophysiological phenomena. Consider pain, for example: it seems
reasonable to suppose that neurophysiological causes of pains, at least in human
beings, are quite limited and specific. Indeed, we discussed some of them in an earlier
lecture. There seems to be no obstacle in principle to having a perfect
neurophysiology of pain. But what about, say, vision?
Once again, it’s bard to see any obstacle in principle to getting an adequate
neurophysiology of vision. We might even get to the point where we could describe
perfectly the neurophysiological conditions for having certain sorts of visual
experiences. The experience of seeing that something is red, for instance.
But now here comes the hard part: though we might get systematic correlations
between neurophysiology and pain, or neurophysiology and the visual experience of
red, we couldn’t get similar accounts of the neurophysiology of seeing that something
was money. Why not?
Granted that every time you see that there’s some money in front of you some
neurophysiological process goes on, what’s to prevent it from being the same process
every time?
Well, from the fact that money can have an indefinite range of physical forms; it
follows that it can have an indefinite range of stimulus effects on our nervous
systems. But since it can have an indefinite range of stimulus patterns on our visual
systems, it would once again be a miracle if they all produced exactly the same
neurophysiological effect on the brain. And what goes for seeing that something is

6

money goes even more forcefully for believing that it’s money. It would be nothing
short of miraculous if every time someone believed that he was short of money, in
whatever language and culture he had this belief in; it had exactly the same type of
neurophysiological realisation. And that’s simply because the range of possible
neurophysiological stimuli that could produce that very belief is infinite.
Paradoxically, the way that the mental infects the physical prevents there ever being a
strict science of the mental.
Notice that in cases where we do not have this sort of interaction between the social
and the physical phenomena this obstacle to having strict social sciences is not
present. Consider the example I mentioned earlier of Chomsky’s hypothesis of
universal grammar.
Suppose each of us had innately programmed in our brains the rules of universal
grammar. Since these rules are in the brain at birth and independent of any relations
the organism has with the environment, there’s nothing in my argument to prevent
there being strict psychophysical laws connecting these rules and features of the brain,
however interrelated and complicated the rules might be.
Well, I promised to try to give you at least the sketch of a step-by-step argument.
Let’s see how far I got in keeping the promise. Let’s set the argument out as a series
of steps.
1. For there to be laws of the social sciences in the sense of which there are laws of
physics, there must be some systematic correlation between phenomena identified in
social and psychological terms and phenomena identified in physical terms. It can be
as complex as the way that weather phenomena are connected with the phenomena of
physics, but there has to be some systematic correlation. In the contemporary jargon,
there have to be some bridge principles between the higher and the lower levels.
2. Social phenomena are in large part defined in terms of the psychological attitudes
that people take. What counts as money, or a promise or a marriage, is in large part a
matter of what people think of as money, a promise or a marriage.
3. This has the consequence that these categories are physically open-ended. There is,
strictly speaking, no physical limit to what we can regard as, or stipulate to he,
money, or a promise or a marriage ceremony.
4. That implies that there can’t be any bridge principles between the social and the
physical features of the world: that is, between phenomena described in social terms
and the same phenomena described in physical terms. We can’t even have the sort of
loose disjunctive principles we have for the weather or digestion.
5. Furthermore, it’s impossible to get the right kind of bridge principles between
phenomena described in mental terms and phenomena described in
neurophysiological terms: that is, between the brain and the mind. And this is because
there is an indefinite range of stimulus conditions for any given social concept. This
enormous range prevents concepts that are not built into us from being realised in a
way that systematically correlates mental and physical features.

7

I want to conclude this lecture by describing what seems to me the true character of
the social sciences.
The social sciences in general are about various aspects of intentionality. Economics
is about the production and distribution of goods and services. Notice that the working
economist can simply take intentionality for granted. He assumes that entrepreneurs
are trying to make money and that consumers would prefer to be better off rather than
worse off. And the ‘laws’ of economics then state systematic fallouts or consequences
of such assumptions. Given certain assumptions, the economist can deduce that
rational entrepreneurs ‘ill sell where their marginal cost equals their marginal revenue.
Now, notice that the law doesn’t predict that the businessman asks himself: ‘Am I
selling where marginal cost equals my marginal revenue?’ No, the law doesn’t state
the content of individual intentionality. Rather, it works out the consequences of such
intentionality. The theory of the firm in microeconomics works out the consequences
of certain assumptions about the desires and possibilities of consumers and businesses
engaging in buying, producing and selling. Macroeconomics works out the
consequences of such assumptions for whole nations and societies.
Since economics is grounded not in systematic facts about physical properties such as
molecular structure, in the way that, for example, chemistry is grounded in systematic
facts about molecular structure, but rather, economics is grounded in facts about
human intentionality, about desires, practices, states of technology and states of
knowledge, it follows that economics cannot be free of history or context. Economics
as a science presupposes certain historical facts about people and societies that are not
themselves part of economics. And when those facts change, economics as a subject
has to change.
For example, until recently the Philips curve, a formula relating a series of factors in
industrial societies seemed to give an accurate description of economic realities in
those societies. Well, lately, it hasn’t worked so well. I think most economists believe
that this is because it didn’t accurately describe reality. But they might consider:
perhaps it did accurately describe reality as it was at that time. 1-low- ever, after the
oil crises and various other events of the Seventies, reality changed. Economics is a
systematic formalised science, but it’s not independent of context or free of history. It
is grounded in human practices, but those practices are not themselves timeless,
eternal or inevitable.
Well, let’s now turn to linguistics. The standard contemporary aim of linguistics is to
state the various rules—phonological, syntactic and semantic—that relate sounds and
meanings in the various natural languages. An ideally complete science of linguistics
would give the complete set of rules for every natural human language. I’m not sure
that this is the right goal for linguistics, or even that it is a goal that’s possible of
attainment, but for the present purposes the important thing to note is that it is once
again an applied science of intentionality. It is not in the least like chemistry or
geology. It is concerned with specifying those historically determined intentional
contents in the minds of speakers of the various languages that are actually
responsible for human linguistic competence. As with economics, the glue that binds
linguistics together is human intentionality.

8

The upshot of this fifth lecture can now be stated quite simply. The radical
discontinuity between the social and the natural sciences doesn’t come from the fact
that there’s only a disjunctive connection of social and physical phenomena. It doesn’t
even come from the fact that social disciplines have constitutive concepts which have
no echo in physics or even from the great complexity of social life. Many disciplines,
such as geology, biology and meteorology, have these features, but that does not
prevent them from being systematic natural sciences. No. the radical discontinuity
derives from the intrinsically mental character of social and psychological
phenomena.
The fact that the social sciences are powered by the mind is the source of their
weakness vis-à-vis the natural sciences. But it’s also precisely the source of their
strength as social sciences. What we want from the social sciences and what we get
from the social sciences at their best are theories of pure and applied intentionality.

9

