REITH LECTURES 1984: Minds, Brains and Science
John Searle
Lecture 4: Walk to Patagonia
TRANSMISSION: 28 November 1984 – Radio 4

The purpose of this lecture is to explain the structure of human action. I need to do
that for several reasons. I need to show how the nature of action is consistent with my
account of the mind-body problem and my rejection of artificial intelligence, both of
which I discussed in earlier lectures. I need to explain the mental component of action
and show how it relates to the physical component. I need to show how the structure
of action relates to the explanation of action. And I need to lay a foundation for the
discussion of the nature of the social sciences and the possibility of the freedom of the
will, both of which I’ll discuss in my last two lectures.
I hope in the end that what I say will seem like a commonsense account of the
structure of action. If I am right, what I say should seem obviously tight. But, as
usual, common sense is no, simple. In fact, it is remarkably complicated. And
historically, what I think of as the commonsense account of action has not seemed
obvious. For one thing, the behaviourist tradition in philosophy and psychology has
led many people to neglect the mental component of actions. Behaviourists wanted to
define actions, arid indeed all of our mental life, in terms of sheer physical
movements. Somebody once characterised the behaviourist approach, justifiably in
my view, as feigning anaesthesia. The opposite extreme in philosophy has been to say
that the only acts we ever perform are inner mental acts of volition. On this view, we
don’t, strictly speaking, ever raise our arms. All we do is volit that our arms go up. If
they do go up, that’s so much good luck, but not really our action. Another problem is
that until recently the philosophy of action was a somewhat neglected subject. The
Western tradition has persistently emphasised knowing as more important than doing.
The theory of knowledge and meaning has been more central to its concerns than the
theory of action.
I want now to try to draw together both the mental and the physical aspects of action,
in such a way as to show both how ‘physical’ actions have a mental component and
how the mental component functions causally in producing the physical component.
If we think about human actions, we immediately find some striking differences
between them and other events in the natural world. At first, it’s tempting to think that
types of actions or behaviour can be identified with types of bodily movements. But
that’s obviously wrong. For example, one and the same set of human bodily
movements might constitute a dance, or signalling, or exercising, or testing one’s
muscles, or none of the above. Furthermore, just as one and the same set of types of
physical movements can constitute completely different kinds of actions, so one type
of action can be performed by a vastly different number of types of physical
movements.

1

Think, for example, of sending a message to a friend. You could write it out on a
sheet of paper. You could type it. You could send it by messenger or by telegram. Or
you could speak it over the telephone. And indeed, each of these ways of sending the
same message could be accomplished in a variety of physical movements. You could
write the note with your left hand or your right hand, with your toes, or even by
holding the pencil between your teeth. Furthermore, another odd feature about actions
which makes them differ from events generally is that actions seem to have preferred
descriptions.
If, for example, I’m going for a walk to Hyde Park, there are any number of other
things that are happening in the course of my walk, but their descriptions do not
describe my intentional action, because in acting, what Cm doing depends in large
part on what I think I’m doing. So, for example, I’m also moving in the general
direction of Patagonia, shaking the hair on my head up and down, wearing out my
shoes, and moving a lot of air molecules. However, none of these other descriptions
seems to get at what is essential about this action.
A third related feature of actions is that a person is in a special position to know what
he’s doing. He doesn’t have to observe himself or conduct an investigation to see
which actions he is performing, or at least is trying to perform. So, if you say to me,
‘Are you trying to walk to Hyde Park or trying to get closer to Patagonia?’, I have no
hesitation in giving an answer, even though the physical movements that I make
might be appropriate for either answer.
It’s also a remarkable fact about human beings that, quite effortlessly, we’re able to
identify and explain the behaviour of ourselves and of other people. I believe that this
ability rests on an unconscious mastery of a certain set of principles, just as our ability
to recognise something as a sentence of English rests on our having an unconscious
mastery of the principles of English grammar.
I believe there is a set of principles that we presuppose when we say such ordinary
commonsense things as that, for example, Basil voted for the Tories because he
thought that they would cure the problem of inflation, or Sally moved from
Birmingham to London because she thought the job opportunities were better there, or
even such simple things as that the man over there making such strange movements is
in fact sharpening an axe, or polishing his shoes.
It’s quite common for people who recognise the existence of these theoretical
principles to sneer at them by saying that they’re just a folk theory and that they
should be supplanted by some more scientific account of human behaviour. I am
suspicious of this claim, just as I would be suspicious of a claim that said we should
supplant our implicit theory of English grammar, the one we acquired by learning the
language. And the reason for my suspicion in each case is the same: using the implicit
theory is part of performing the actions, in the same way that using the rules of
grammar is part of speaking. So, though we might add to it or discover all sorts of
interesting additional things about language or about behaviour, it’s very unlikely that
we could replace that theory which is implicit and partly constitutive of the
phenomenon by some external ‘scientific’ account of that very phenomenon.

2

Aristotle and Descartes would have been completely familiar with most of our
explanations of human behaviour, but not with our explanations of biological and
physical phenomena. The reason usually given for this is that Aristotle and Descartes
had both a primitive theory of biology and physics on the one hand, and a primitive
theory of human behaviour on the other, and that while we’ve advanced in biology
and physics, we’ve made no comparable advance in the explanation of human
behaviour. I want to suggest an alternative view. I think that Aristotle and Descartes,
like ourselves, already had a sophisticated and complex theory of human behaviour. I
also think that many supposedly scientific accounts of behaviour, such as Freud’s, for
example, in fact employ rather than replace the principles of our implicit theory of
human behaviour,
To summarise, then, what I’ve said so far: there’s more to types of action than
physical movements; actions have preferred descriptions, people know what they’re
doing without observation, and the principles by which we identify and explain action
are themselves part of the actions; that is, they’re partly constitutive of actions. I now
want to give a brief account of what we might call the structure of behaviour.
In order to explain the structure of behaviour, I need to introduce one or two technical
terms. The key notion in the structure of behaviour is the notion of intentionality. To
say that a mental state has intentionality simply means that it is about something. For
example, a belief is always a belief that such and such the case, or a desire is always a
desire that such and such should happen or be the case intending, in the ordinary
sense, has no special role in the theory of intentionality. Intending to do something is
just one kind of intentionality, along with believing, desiring, hoping, fearing, and all
the rest.
An intentional state like a belief, or a desire, or an intention in the ordinary sense,
characteristically has two components. It has what we might call its ‘content’, which
makes it about something, and its ‘psychological mode’ or ‘type’. Now, the reason we
need this distinction is that you can have the same content in different types. So, for
example, I can want to leave the room, I can intend to leave the room and I can
believe that I will leave the room. In each case, we have the same content, that I will
leave the room; but in different psychological modes or types: belief, desire, and
intending respectively.
Furthermore, the content and the type of state will serve to relate the mental state to
the world. That, after all, is why we have minds with mental states; to represent the
world to ourselves; to represent how it is, how we’d like it to be, how we fear it may
turn out, what we intend to do about it, and so on. Now, this has the consequence that
our beliefs will be true if they match the way the world is, false if they don’t; our
desires will be fulfilled or frustrated, our intentions carried out or not carried out.
In general then, intentional states have what we might call ‘conditions of satisfaction’.
Each state itself determines under what conditions it’s true (if, say, it’s a belief) or
under what conditions it’s fulfilled (if, say, it’s a desire) and under what conditions
it’s carried out (if it’s an intentions). In each case the mental state represents its own
conditions of satisfaction.

3

A third feature to notice about such states is that sometimes they cause things to
happen. For example, if I want to go to the movies, and I do go to the movies,
normally my desire will cause the very event that it represents, my going to the
movies. In such cases there is an internal connection between the cause and the effect,
because the cause is a representation of the very state of affairs that it causes. The
cause both represents and brings about the effect. I call such kinds of cause-and-effect
relations cases of ‘intentional causation’.
Intentional causation, as we will see, will prove crucial both to the structure and to the
explanation of human action. It is in various ways quite different from the standard
textbook accounts of causation, where, for example, one billiard ball hits another
billiard ball, and causes it to move. For our purposes the essential thing about
intentional causation is that in such cases the mind brings about the very state of
affairs that it has been thinking about.
To summarise this discussion of intentionality, there are three features that we need to
keep in mind in our analysis of human behaviour: first, intentional states consist of a
content in a certain mental type. Second, they determine their conditions of
satisfaction; that is, they’ll be satisfied or not depending on whether the world
matches the content of the state. And third, sometimes they cause things to happen, by
way of intentional causation to bring about a match—that is, to bring about the state
of affairs they represent, and what they represent are the very states of affairs that
have to happen for them to be satisfied: their own conditions of satisfaction.
Using these ideas I’ll now turn to the main task of this lecture. I promised to give a
very brief account of what might be called the structure of action, or the structure of
behaviour. By behaviour here, I mean voluntary, intentional human behaviour. I mean
such things as walking, running, eating, making love, voting in elections, getting
married, buying and selling, going on a vacation, working on a job. I don’t mean such
things as digesting, growing older or snoring. But even restricting ourselves to
.intentional behaviour, human activities present us with a bewildering variety of types.
We need to distinguish between individual behaviour and social behaviour, between
collective social behaviour and individual behaviour within a social collection,
between doing something for the sake of something else, and doing something for its
own sake. Perhaps most difficult of all we need to account for the melodic sequences
of behaviour through the passage of time. Human activities, after all, are not like a
series of still snapshots, but something more like the movie of our life. I obviously
can’t try to answer all of these questions in this lecture, but I can give you a sketch of
the basic structure of action. An account of the structure of behaviour can be best
given by stating a set of principles. These principles should explain both the mental
and physical aspects of action. In presenting them I won’t be discussing where our
beliefs and desires and so on come from. But I will be explaining how they figure in
our behaviour.
I think the simplest way to convey these principles is just to state them and then try to
defend them. So here goes. Principle number 1: actions characteristically consist of
two components, a mental component and a physical component. Think, for example,
of pushing a car. On the one hand there are certain conscious experiences of effort
when you push. If successful, those experiences will result in the movement of your
body and the corresponding movement of the car. If you are unsuccessful, you will

4

still have had at least the mental component; that is, you will still have had an
experience of trying to move the car with at least some of the physical components.
There will have been muscle tightenings, the feeling of pressure against the car, and
so on.
And this leads to Principle number 2: the mental component is an intention. It has
intentionality—it is about something. It determines what counts as success or failure
in the action; and, if successful, it causes the bodily movement which in turn causes
the other movements, such as the movement of the car, which constitute the rest of the
action.
In terms of the theory of intentionality that we just sketched, the action consists of two
components—a mental component and a physical component. If successful, the
mental component causes the physical component and it represents the physical
component. ‘This form of causation I just called ‘intentional causation’.
The best way to see the nature of the different components of an action is to carve
each one off and examine it separately. And in fact, in a Laboratory, it’s easy enough
to do that. We already have, in neurophysiology experiments done by Wilder Penfield
of Montreal, where by electrically stimulating a certain portion of the patient’s motor
cortex; he could cause the movement of the patient’s limbs. Now, the patients were
invariably surprised at this, and they characteristically said such things as: ‘I didn’t do
that—you did it.’ In such a case we have carved off the bodily movement without the
intention. Notice that in such cases the bodily movements might be exactly the same
as they are in an intentional action, but it seems quite clear that there’s a difference.
Well, what is the difference?
We also have experiments going back as far as William James, where we can carve
off the mental component without the corresponding physical component of the
action. In the William James case, a patient’s arm is anaesthetised and it is held at his
side in a dark room, and he is then ordered to raise it. He does what he thinks is
obeying the order, but is later quite surprised to discover that his arm didn’t go up.
Now, in that case, we carve off the mental component, that is to say, the intention
from the bodily movement. For the man really did have the intention. That is, we can
truly say of him, he genuinely did try to move his arm.
In the normal case these two components come together. We usually have both the
intention and the bodily movement, but they’re not independent. What our first two
principles try to articulate is how they are related. The mental component as part of its
conditions of satisfaction has to both represent and cause the physical component.
Let’s turn now to Principle number 3: the kind of causation which is essential both to
the structure of action and the explanation of action is intentional causation. The
bodily movements in our actions are caused by our intentions. Intentions are causal
because they make things happen; but they also have contents and so can figure in the
process of logical reasoning. They can be both causal and have these logical features,
because the kind of causation that we’re talking about is mental causation or
intentional causation. And in intentional causation mental contents affect the world.
The whole apparatus works because it’s realised in the brain, in the way that I
explained in the first lecture.

5

The form of causation that we’re discussing here is really quite different from the
standard form of causation as described in philosophical textbooks. It’s not a matter of
regularities or covering laws or constant conjunctions. In fact, I think it’s much closer
to our commonsense notion of causation where we just mean that something makes
something else happen. What is special about intentional causation is that it is a case
of a mental state making something else happen, and that something else is the very
state of affairs represented by the mental state that causes it.
Principle number 4: in the theory of action, there’s a fundamental distinction between
those actions which are premeditated, which are the result of some kind of planning in
advance, and those actions which are spontaneous, where we do something without
any prior reflection. And, corresponding to this distinction, we need a distinction
between prior intentions, that is, intentions formed prior to the performance of an
action, and intentions in action, which are the intentions we have while we are
actually performing an action.
A common mistake in the theory of action is to suppose that all intentional actions are
the result of some sort of deliberation, that they are the product of a chain of practical
reasoning. But, obviously, many things we do are not is like that! We simply do
something without any prior reflection. For example, in a normal conversation, one
doesn’t reflect on what one is going to say next, one just says it. In such cases, there is
indeed an intention, but it’s not an intention formed prior to the performance of the
action. I call it an intention in action.
In other cases, however, we do form prior intentions. We reflect on what we want and
what’s the best way to achieve it. This process of reflection (Aristotle called it
‘practical reasoning’ by the way), characteristically results either in the formation of a
prior intention, or, as Aristotle also pointed out, sometimes it results in the action
itself.
Principle number 5: the formation of prior intentions is, at least generally, the result of
practical reasoning. And practical reasoning is always reasoning about how best to
decide between conflicting desires. The motive force behind most human (and
animal) action is desire. Beliefs function only to enable us to figure out how best to
satisfy our desires.
So, for example, suppose I want to go to Paris, and I believe that the best way, all
things considered, is to go by plane. I then form the intention to go by plane. Now,
that’s a typical and common sense piece of practical reasoning. But practical
reasoning differs crucially from theoretical reasoning, from reasoning about what is
the case, in that practical reasoning is always about how best to decide among various
conflicting desires that we have, in a way that theoretical reasoning is not
characteristically about how to decide between conflicting beliefs. So, for example,
suppose I do want to go to Paris, and I figure that the best way to go is to go by plane.
Still, there’s no way I can do that without frustrating a large number of other desires
that I have. I don’t want to spend the money, I don’t want to stand in queues at
airports, I don’t want people to put their elbow where I’m trying to put my elbow; and
so on indefinitely. None the less, in spite of all the desires that will be frustrated if I
go to Paris by plane, I may still reason that it’s best, all things considered, to go to

6

Paris by plane. This is not only typical of practical reasoning, but I think it’s universal
in practical reasoning that practical reasoning concerns the adjudication of conflicting
desires.
Well, the picture that emerges from these five principles, then, is that the mental
energy that powers action is an energy that works by intentional causation. It’s a form
of energy whereby the cause, either in the form of desires or intentions, represents the
very state of affairs that it causes.
Now let’s go back to some of those points about action that I made at the beginning,
because I think we’ve assembled enough pieces to explain them. We noticed that
actions have preferred descriptions, and that, in fact, common sense enabled us to
identify what the preferred descriptions of actions were. Now we can see that the
preferred description of an action is determined by the intention in action. What the
person is really doing, or at least what he’s trying to do, is entirely a matter of what
the intention is that he is acting with. For example, I know that I’m trying to get to
Hyde Park and not trying to get close to Patagonia, because that’s the intention with
which I’m going for a walk.
This, furthermore, explains some of the logical features about the explanations that we
give of human action. To explain an action is to give its causes. Its causes are
psychological states. Those states relate to the action either by being steps in the
practical reasoning that led to the intentions or by being the intentions themselves.
The most important feature of the explanation of action, however, is worth statement
as a separate principle, so let’s call it Principle number 6: the explanation of an action
must have the same content as was in the person’s head when he performed the
action, or when he reasoned toward his intention to perform the action. The content
that causes behaviour by way of intentional causation must be identical with the
content in the explanation of the behaviour.
Now, in this respect actions differ from other natural events in the world and,
correspondingly, their explanations differ. When we explain an earthquake or a
hurricane, the content in the explanation only has to represent what happened and why
it happened. It doesn’t actually have to cause the event itself. But in explaining human
behaviour, the cause and the explanation both have contents and the explanation only
explains because it has the same content as the cause.
Well, so far we’ve been talking as if people just had intentions out of the blue. But, of
course, that’s very unrealistic. And we need to now to introduce some complexities
which will get our analysis at least a bit closer to the affairs of real life. No one ever
just has an intention just like that by itself. For example, suppose I have an intention
to drive to Oxford from London; I might have that quite spontaneously, none the less I
must still have a series of other intentional states. I must have a belief that I have a
car, and a belief that Oxford is within driving distance. Furthermore I will
characteristically have a desire that the roads won’t be too crowded and a wish that
the weather won’t be too bad for driving. Also— and here we get a little closer to the
notion of the explanation of action—I will characteristically not just drive to Oxford,
but drive to Oxford for some purpose. And if so, I will characteristically engage in
practical reasoning—that form of reasoning that leads not to beliefs or conclusions of

7

arguments but to actual behaviour. And when we understand this form of reasoning
we will have made a great step toward understanding the explanation of actions.
Let’s call all the other intentional states that give the original intentional state the
particular meaning that it has ‘the network of intentionality’. And we can say by way
of a general conclusion (let’s call this Principle number 7): any intentional state only
functions as part of a network of other intentional states. And by ‘functions’ here, I
mean that it only determines its conditions of satisfaction relative to a whole lot of
other intentional states.
Now, when we begin to probe the details of the network, we discover another
interesting phenomenon. And that is simply that the activities of our minds cannot
consist in mental states, so to speak, right down to the ground. Rather, our mental
states only function in the way they do because they function against a background of
capacities, abilities, skills, habits, ways of doing things, and general stances toward
the world that do not themselves consist in intentional states. In order for me so much
as to form the intention to drive to Oxford I have to have the ability to drive. But the
ability to drive doesn’t itself consist in a whole lot of other intentional states. It takes
more than a bunch of beliefs and desires and so on in order to be able to drive. I
actually have to have the skill to do it. This is a case where my knowing how is not
just a matter of knowing that.
Now, let’s call the set of skills, habits, abilities and so on, against which intentional
states function, ‘the background of intentionality’. And to the thesis of the network,
namely the thesis that any intentional state only functions as a part of a network, let us
add the thesis of the background. Call it Principle number 8: the whole network of
intentionality only functions against a background of human capacities that are not
themselves mental states.
I said that many supposedly scientific accounts of behaviour try to escape from or
surpass this commonsense model that I’ve been sketching. But, in the end, there’s no
way I think they can do that, because these principles don’t just describe the
phenomena, they themselves partly go to make up the phenomena. Consider, say,
Freudian explanations.
When Freud is doing his metapsychology, that is, when he’s giving us a theory of
what he’s doing, he often uses scientific comparisons. There are a lot of analogies
between psychology on the one hand and electromagnetism and hydraulics on the
other, and we’re to think of the mind as functioning on the analogy of some sort of
hydraulic principles. But when he’s actually examining a patient, and actually
describing the nature of some patient’s neurosis, it is surprising how much the
explanations he gives are commonsense explanations. So Dora behaves the way she
does because, for example, she’s in love with Hen K. or because she’s imitating her
cousin who’s gone off to Mariazell. Now, what Freud adds to common sense is the
observation that often the mental states that cause our behaviour are unconscious;
indeed, they’re repressed. We’re often resistant to admitting to having certain
intentional states because we’re ashamed of them or for some other reason.
And secondly, Freud also adds a theory of the transformations of mental states—how
one sort of intentional state can be transformed into another. But with the addition of

8

these and other such accretions, the Freudian form of explanation is very much the
same as the commonsense form. And I suggest that common sense is likely to persist
even as we acquire other, more scientific accounts of behaviour. Since the structure of
the explanation has to match the structure of the phenomena explained, improvements
in explanation are not likely to have new and unheard-of structures.
In this lecture I’ve tried to explain how and in what sense behaviour both contains and
is caused by internal mental states. It may seem surprising that many psychologists
and cognitive scientists have tried to deny these relations. The reasons for this derive
from a certain conception they have of science. They think a scientific account of
human behaviour should not be founded on a commonsense conception of mental
states. They think that a scientific account of human behaviour cannot be based on
such subjective mental phenomena as beliefs, desires, hopes, fears, and so on. I have
argued that an account of action must be based on these phenomena if it is to succeed.

9

