REITH LECTURES 1984: Minds, Brains and Science
John Searle
Lecture 6: The Freedom of the Will
TRANSMISSION: 12 December 1984 – Radio 4

In these lectures I have tried to answer what are to me some of the most worrisome
questions about how we as human beings fit into the rest of the universe. Our
conception of ourselves as free agents is fundamental to our overall self-conception.
Now, ideally, I would like to be able to keep both my commonsense conceptions and
my scientific beliefs. In the case of the relation between mind and body, for example,
1 was able to do that. But when it comes to the question of freedom and determinism,
I am—like a lot of other philosophers—unable to reconcile the two.
One would think that after over 2,000 years of worrying about it, the problem of the
freedom of the will would by now have been finally solved. Well, actually, most
philosophers think it has been solved. They think it was solved by Thomas Hobbes
and David Hume and various other empirically-minded philosophers whose solutions
have been repeated and improved right into the 20th century. I think it has not been
solved. In this lecture I want to give you an account of what the problem is, and why
the contemporary solution is not a solution, and then conclude by trying to explain
why the problem is likely to stay with us.
On the one hand we’re inclined to say that since nature consists of particles and their
relations with each other, and since everything can be accounted for in terms of those
particles and their relations, there is simply no room for freedom of the will. As far as
human freedom is concerned, it doesn’t matter whether physics is deterministic, as
Newtonian physics was, or whether it allows for randomness or indeterminacy at the
level of particle physics, as contemporary quantum mechanics does. Indeterminism at
the level of particles in physics is really no support at all to any doctrine of the
freedom of the will; because, first, the statistical indeterminacy at the level of particles
does not show any indeterminacy at the level of the objects that matter to us, human
bodies, for example. And secondly, even if there is an element of indeterminacy in the
behaviour of physical particles—even if they are only statistically predictable—still,
that by itself gives no scope for human freedom of the will, it doesn’t follow from the
fact that particles are only statistically determined that the human mind can force the
statistically determined particles to swerve from their paths.
The strongest image for conveying this conception of determinism is still that
formulated by Laplace: if an ideal observer knew the positions of all the particles at a
given instant and knew all the laws governing their movements, he could predict and
retrodict the entire history of the universe. Some of the predictions of a contemporary
quantum mechanical Laplace might be statistical, but they would still allow no room
for freedom of the will.
So much for the appeal of determinism. Now let’s turn to the argument for the
freedom of the will.

1

As many philosophers have pointed out, if there is any fact of experience that we are
all familiar with, it’s the simple fact that our own choices, decisions, reasonings and
cogitations seem to make a difference to our actual behaviour. There are all sorts of
experiences that we have in life where it seems just a fact of our experience that,
though we did one thing, we know, or at least think we know, perfectly well that we
could have done something else. We know we could have done something else
because we chose one thing for certain reasons. But we were aware that there were
also reasons for choosing something else and, indeed, we might have acted on those
reasons and chosen that something else.
Another way to put this point is to say: it’s just a plain empirical fact about our
behaviour that it isn’t predictable in the way that the behaviour of objects rolling
down an inclined plane is predictable. And the reason it isn’t predictable in that way is
that we could often do otherwise than we in fact did. Human freedom is just a fact of
experience. And if we want some empirical proof of this fact, we can simply point to
the further fact that it’s always up to us to falsify any predictions that anybody might
care to make about our behaviour. If somebody predicts that I’m going to do
something, I might just damn well do something else. Now, that sort of option is
simply not open to glaciers moving down mountainsides or balls rolling down
inclined planes or the planets moving in their elliptical orbits.
This is a characteristic philosophical conundrum. On the one hand, a set of very
powerful arguments force us to the conclusion that free will has no place in the
universe. On the other hand, a series of powerful arguments based on facts of our own
experience inclines us to the conclusion that there must be some freedom of the will
because we all experience it all the time.
There’s a standard solution to this philosophical conundrum. According to this
solution, free will and determinism are perfectly compatible with each other. Of
course, according to this solution, everything in the world is determined, but some
actions are none the less free. To say that they are free is not to deny that they are
determined; it’s just to say that they are not constrained. We’re not forced to do them.
So, for example, if a man is forced to do something at gunpoint, or if he is suffering
from some psychological compulsion, then his behaviour is genuinely unfree. But if,
on the other hand, he freely acts, if he acts as we say, of his own free will, then his
behaviour is free. Of course, it’s also completely determined, since every aspect of his
behaviour is determined by the physical forces operating on the particles that compose
his body, as they operate on all of the bodies in the universe. So, according to this
view, free behaviour exists, but it’s just a small corner of the determined world—it’s
that corner of determined behaviour where certain kinds of force and compulsion are
absent.
Now, because this view asserts the compatibility of free will and determinism, it’s
usually called simply ‘compatibilism’. I think it’s inadequate as a solution to the
problem, and here’s why.
The problem about the freedom of the will is not about whether or not there are inner
psychological reasons that cause us to do things as well as external physical causes
and inner compulsions. Rather, it’s about whether or not the causes of our behaviour,
whatever they are, are sufficient to determine the behaviour so that things have to

2

happen the way they do happen. And there’s another way to put this problem. is it
ever true to say of a person that he could have done otherwise, all other conditions
remaining the same? For example, given that a person chose to vote for the Tories,
could be have chosen to vote for one of the other parties, all other conditions
remaining the same?
Now, compatibilism doesn’t really answer that question in a way that allows any
scope for the ordinary notion of the freedom of the will. What it says is that all
behaviour is determined in such a way that it couldn’t have occurred otherwise, all
other conditions remaining the same. Everything that happened was indeed
determined. It’s just that some things were determined by certain sorts of inner
psychological causes (those which we call our ‘reasons for acting’) and not by
external forces or psychological compulsions. So, we’re still left with a problem. Is it
ever true to say of a human being that he could have done otherwise? Compatibilism,
in short, denies the substance of free will while maintaining its verbal shell.
Well, then, let’s try to make a fresh start. I said that we have a conviction of our own
free will simply based on the facts of human experience. But perhaps our belief that
such experiences support the doctrine of human freedom is illusory. Consider this sort
of example. A typical hypnosis experiment has the following form. Under hypnosis
the patient is given a posthypnotic suggestion. You can tell him, for example, to do
some fairly trivial, harmless thing, such as, let’s say, crawl around on the floor. Now,
after the patient comes out of hypnosis, he might be engaging in conversation, sitting,
drinking coffee, when suddenly he says so me thing like ‘What a fascinating floor in
this room!’ or ‘I want to check out this rug’ or ‘I’m thinking of investing in floor
coverings and I’d like to investigate the coverings on this floor’. And he then
proceeds to crawl around on the floor.
The interest of these cases is that the patient always gives some more or less adequate
reason for doing what he does. That is, be seems to himself to be behaving freely. We,
on the other hand, have good reasons to believe that his behaviour isn’t free at all, that
the reasons he gives for his apparent decision to crawl around on the floor are
irrelevant, that his behaviour was determined in advance, that he is, in short, in the
grip of a post-hypnotic suggestion. Now, one way to pose the problem of
determinism, or at least one important aspect of the problem of determinism, is: ‘Is all
human behaviour like that?’
But if we take that example seriously, it looks as if it proves to be an argument for the
freedom of the will and not against it. The agent thought he was acting freely, though
in fact his behaviour was determined. But it seems empirically very unlikely that all
human behaviour is like that. Sometimes people are indeed suffering from the effects
of hypnosis, and sometimes we know that they’re in the grip of unconscious urges
which they cannot control. But are they always like that? Is all human behaviour
determined by such psychological compulsions?
The thesis of psychological determinism is that prior psychological causes determine
all of our behaviour in the way that they determine the behaviour of the hypnosis
subject or the heroin addict. On this view, all behaviour, in one way or another, is
psychologically compulsive. But the available evidence suggests that such a thesis is
false.

3

We do indeed normally act on the basis of our intentional states—our beliefs, hopes,
fears, desires, and so on—and in that sense our mental states function causally. But
this form of cause and effect relation is not deterministic. We might have had exactly
those mental states and still not have done what we did. Instances of hypnosis and
psychologically compulsive behaviour on the one hand are usually pathological and
easily distinguishable from normal free action on the other. So, psychologically
speaking, there does seem to be scope for human freedom.
But is this solution really an advance on compatibilism? Aren’t we just saying, once
again, yes, all behaviour is determined, but what we call free behaviour is the sort
determined by rational thought processes? Sometimes the conscious, rational thought
processes don’t make any difference, as in the hypnosis case, and sometimes they do,
as in the normal case. But of course those nominal rational thought processes are as
much determined as anything else. So, once again, don’t we have the result that
everything we do was entirely written in the book of history billions of years before
we were born, and therefore nothing we do is free in any philosophically interesting
sense? If we choose to call our behaviour free, that’s just a matter of adopting a
traditional terminology. Just as we continue to speak of ‘sunsets’, even though we
know perfectly well that the sun doesn’t literally set, so we continue to speak of
‘acting of our own free will’, even though there is no such phenomenon.
One way to examine a philosophical thesis - or any other kind of thesis, for that
matter - is to ask: ‘What difference would it make? How would the world be any
different if that thesis were true, as opposed to how the world would be if that thesis
were false?’
Now, part of the appeal of determinism, I believe, is that it seems to be consistent
with the way the world in fact proceeds, at least as far as we know anything about it
from physics. That is, if determinism were true, then the world would proceed pretty
much the way it does proceed, the only difference being that certain of our beliefs
about its proceedings would be false. But if libertarianism—that is, the thesis of free
will—were true, it appears we would have to make some really radical changes in our
beliefs about the world. In order for us to have radical freedom, then, it looks as if we
would have to postulate that inside each of us was a self that was capable of
interfering with the causal order of nature. That is. it looks as if we would have to
contain some entity that was capable of making molecules swerve from their paths. I
don’t know if such a view is even intelligible, but it’s certainly not consistent with
what we know about how the world works from physics. And there’s not the slightest
evidence to suppose that we should abandon physical theory in favour of such a view.
So far, then, we seem to be getting exactly nowhere in our effort to resolve the
conflict between determinism and the belief in the freedom of the will. Science seems
to allow no place for freedom of the will, and indeterminism in physics offers no
support for the freedom of the will. On the other hand, we seem to be unable to give
up the belief in the freedom of the will. So let’s investigate both of these points a bit
further.
Why, exactly, is there no room for the freedom of the will on the contemporary
scientific view of the universe? Our basic explanatory mechanisms in physics work

4

from the bottom up. That is to say, we explain the behaviour of surface features of a
phenomenon such as the transparency of glass or the liquidity of water in terms of the
behaviour of micro particles such as molecules. And the relation of the mind to the
brain is an example of such a relation.
But we get causation from the mind to the body; that is, we get top-down causation
over a passage of time. And we get top-down causation over time because the top
level and the bottom level go together. So, for example, suppose I want to cause the
release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine at the axon end-plates of my
motorneurons: I can do it by simply deciding to raise my arm and then raising it. Here
the mental event, the intention to raise my arm, causes the physical event, the release
of acetylcholine and that’s a case of top-down causation if ever there was one.
But such cases of top-down causation only work because the mental events are
grounded in the neurophysiology to start with. So, corresponding to the description of
the causal relations that go from the top to the bottom, there’s another description of
the same series of events where the causal relations bounce entirely along the bottom;
that is, they are entirely a matter of neurons and neuron firings at synapses, and so on.
As long as we accept this conception of how nature works, it doesn’t seem that there’s
any scope for the freedom of the will because, on this conception, the mind can only
affect nature in so far as it is already a part of nature. But, if so, then, like the rest of
nature, its features are determined at the basic microlevels of physics. This is actually
an absolutely fundamental point in this lecture, so let me repeat it.
The form of determinism that is ultimately worrisome is not psychological
determinism. The idea that our states of mind are sufficient to determine everything
we do is probably just false. The worrisome form of determinism is more basic and
fundamental. Since all of the surface features of the world are entirely caused by and
realised in systems of micro- elements, then the behaviour of micro-elements is
sufficient to determine everything that happens. Such a ‘bottom-up’ picture of the
world allows for top-down causation (our minds, for example, can affect our bodies).
But the top- down causation only works because the top level is already caused by
and realised in the bottom level.
Let’s turn to the next obvious question. What is it about our experience that makes it
impossible for us to abandon the belief in the freedom of the will? If freedom is an
illusion, why is it an illusion we seem unable to abandon? The first thing to notice
about our conception of human freedom is that it is essentially tied to consciousness.
We only attribute freedom to conscious beings. Suppose, for example, somebody built
a robot which we believed to be totally unconscious: in such a case we would never
feel any inclination to call it free. Even if we found its behaviour random and
unpredictable, we would not say that it was acting freely in the sense that we think of
ourselves as acting freely. If, on the other hand, somebody built a robot that we
became convinced bad consciousness, in the same sense that we do, then it would at
least be an open question whether or not that robot had freedom of the will.
The second point to note is that it is not just any state of consciousness that gives us
the conviction of human freedom. If life consisted entirely of the reception of passive
perceptions, then it seems to me we would never so much as form the idea of human
freedom. If you imagine yourself totally immobile, totally unable to move, and unable

5

to determine even the course of your own thoughts, but still receiving stimuli—for
example, say, periodic mildly painful sensations—there would not in such a case be
the slightest inclination to conclude that you had freedom of the will.
I said earlier that most philosophers think that the conviction of human freedom is so
me- how essentially tied to the process of rational decision-making. But I think that’s
only partly true. In fact, weighing up reasons is only a very special case of the
experiences that give us the conviction of freedom. The characteristic experience that
gives us the conviction of human freedom—and it is an experience from which we are
unable to strip away the conviction of freedom—is the experience of engaging in
voluntary, intentional human actions. Now, it’s that sort of experience which is the
foundation stone of our belief in the freedom of the will. Why?
Reflect very carefully on the character of the experiences you have as you engage in
normal, everyday ordinary human actions. You will sense the possibility of alternative
courses of action built into these experiences. If you raise your arm or walk across the
room or take a drink of water, you will see that at any point in the experience you
have a sense of alternative courses of action open to you.
If one tries to express it in words, the difference between the experience of perceiving
and the experience of acting is that in perceiving one has the sense This is happening
to me’, while in acting one has the sense ‘I am making this happen’. But the sense that
‘I am making this happen’ carries with it the sense ‘I could be doing something else’.
In normal behaviour, each thing we do carries the conviction, valid or invalid, that we
could be doing something else right here and now—that is, all other conditions
remaining the same. And this, I submit, is the source of our unshakeable conviction in
our own free will. It is perhaps important to emphasise that I am discussing normal
human action. If one is in the grip of a great passion, for example, if one is in the grip
of a great rage, one loses this sense of freedom and one can even be surprised to
discover what one is doing.
Once we notice this feature of the experience of acting, a great deal of the puzzling
phenomena I mentioned earlier is easily explained. Why, for example, do we feel that
the man in the case of post-hypnotic suggestion is not acting freely in the sense in
which we are, even though he might think that he is acting freely?
Well, the reason is that, in an important sense, he doesn’t know what he’s doing. His
actual intention-in-action is totally unconscious. The options that he sees as available
to him are irrelevant to the actual motivation of his behaviour. Notice also that the
compatibilist examples of so-called ‘forced’ or compelled behaviour still, in many
cases, involve the experience of freedom. If, for example, I’m instructed to walk
across the room at gunpoint, still part of the experience is that I sense that it’s literally
open to mc at any step to do something else. The experience of freedom is thus an
essential component of any case of acting with an intention.
Again, you can see this if you contrast the normal case of action with the Penfield
cases, where stimulation of the motor cortex produces an involuntary movement of
the arm or leg. In such a case the patient would experience the movement passively,
as he would experience a sound or a sensation of pain. Unlike intentional actions,
there are no options built into this experience.

6

To see this point clearly, try to imagine that a portion of your life was like the
Penfield experiments on a grand scale. Instead of walking across the room, you
simply find that your body is moving across the room; instead of speaking, you
simply hear and feel words coming out of your mouth. Imagine your experiences are
those of a purely passive but conscious puppet and you will have imagined away the
experience of freedom. But in the typical case of intentional action, there’s no way we
can carve off the experience of freedom. It is an essential part of the experience of
acting.
This also explains, I believe, why we cannot give up our conviction of freedom. We
find it easy enough to give up the conviction that the earth is flat as soon as we
understand the evidence for the heliocentric theory of the solar system. Similarly,
when we look at a sunset, in spite of appearances we do not feel compelled to believe
that the sun is setting behind the earth; we believe that the appearance of the sun
setting is simply an illusion created by the rotation of the earth.
In each case it is possible to give up a commonsense conviction, because the
hypothesis that replaces it both accounts for the experiences that led to that conviction
in the first place as well as explaining a whole lot of other facts that the commonsense
view is unable to account for. That’s why we give up the belief in a flat earth and
literal ‘sunsets’ in favour of the Copernican conception of the solar system. But we
can’t similarly give up the conviction of freedom, because that conviction is built into
every normal, conscious intentional action. And, indeed, we use this conviction in
identifying and explaining actions.
We can now draw the conclusions that are implicit in this discussion. First, if the
worry about determinism is a worry that all of our behaviour is in fact psychologically
compulsive, then it appears that the worry is unwarranted. In so far as psychological
determinism is just an empirical hypothesis like any other, then the evidence we
presently have available to us suggests that it is false. So this does give us a modified
form of compatibilism. It gives us the view that psychological libertarianism is
compatible with physical determinism. Secondly, it even gives us a sense of ‘could
have’ in which people’s behaviour, though determined, is such that in that sense they
could have done otherwise: the sense is simply that, as far as the psychological factors
were concerned, they could have done otherwise. The notions of ability, of what
we’re able to do, and what we could have done, are often relative to some such set of
criteria. For example, I could have voted for Carter in the 1980 American election,
even if I didn’t; but I could not have voted for George Washington. He was not a
candidate. So there’s a sense of ‘could have’ in which there was a range of choices
available to me, and, in that sense, there were a lot of things I could have done, all
other things being equal, which I did not in fact do. Similarly, because the
psychological factors operating on me do not always, or even in general, compel me
to behave in a particular fashion, I often, psychologically speaking, could have done
something different from what I did in fact do.
But, third, this form of compatibilism still does not give us anything like the
resolution of the conflict between freedom and determinism that our urge to radical
libertarianism really demands. As long as we accept the bottom-up conception of
physical explanation—and it’s a conception on which the past 300 years of science

7

are based—then psychological facts about ourselves, like any other higher level facts,
are entirely causally explicable in terms of, and entirely realised in systems of
elements at the fundamental micro-physical level. Our conception of physical reality
simply does not allow for radical freedom.
Fourth, and finally, for reasons that I don’t really understand, evolution has given us a
form of experience of voluntary action where the experience of freedom—that is to
say, the experience of the sense of alternative possibilities—is built into the very
structure of conscious, voluntary, intentional human behaviour. For that reason, I
believe, neither this discussion nor any other will ever convince us that our behaviour
is unfree.
My aim in these lectures has been to try to characterise the relationships between the
conception that we have of ourselves as rational, free, conscious, mindful agents and a
conception that we have of the world as consisting of mindless, meaningless physical
particles. It’s tempting to think that, just as we have discovered that large portions of
common sense do not adequately represent how the world really works, so we might
also discover that our conception of ourselves and our behaviour is entirely false. But
there are limits on this possibility.
The distinction between reality and appearance cannot apply to the very existence of
consciousness. For if it seems to me that I’m conscious, then I am conscious. We can
discover all kinds of startling things about ourselves and our behaviour, but we cannot
discover that we do not have minds, that they do not contain conscious, subjective,
intentionalistic mental states; nor can we discover that we do not at least try to engage
in voluntary intentional actions.
The problem I’ve set myself is not to prove the existence of these things but to
examine their status and their implications for our conceptions of the rest of nature.
My general theme has been that, with certain important exceptions, our commonsense
conception of ourselves is perfectly consistent with our conception of nature as a
physical system.

8

