REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 1: The Power of Do-It-Yourself Economics
TRANSMISSION: 6 November 1985 – Radio 4

John Maynard Keynes's great work, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money, which was published almost exactly50 years ago, ends with a justly famous
tribute to the influence of ideas on events:
The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when they are
right and when they are wrong, are more powerful than is commonly
understood. Indeed the world is ruled by little else. Practical men, who
believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences,
are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. I am sure that the
power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the
gradual encroachment of ideas…it is ideas, not vested interests, which
are dangerous for good or evil.
Not surprisingly, this passage has been quoted many times, and its thesis much
debated, by economists and economic historians down the years.
I can still remember the excitement, and the sense of conviction, which I felt on first
reading it as a student in Oxford just over 40 years ago. Keynes’s words cast for me a
new light on the world, and on the subject I had begun to try to master.
The Phenomenon of Do-It-Yourself Economics
My own views on this have evolved: they have been shaped not just by reading the
works of scholars, but also—and in fact largely—by personal experience and
observation. The experience has been of working as a professional economist in a
number of different roles and countries. I cannot claim to have greatly influenced the
course of events; and so far as I know, no practical man has ever shown signs of
becoming my intellectual slave. But from my long years either in or close to official
bureaucracies, both national and international, I have formed the view that Keynes’s
famous thesis needs to be amended in at least one respect.
The broad direction of his arguments was right; there is no doubt that the policies of
governments have’ been, and still are, strongly influenced by economic ideas. But
contrary to what Keynes assumed, these have not necessarily been the ideas of
economists. Over wide areas of policy the judgments of politicians and their officials,
as also of public opinion in general, have been and still are guided to a large extent by
beliefs and perceptions about the working of the economic system, and about national
interests and the welfare of the community, which owe little or nothing to the
economics profession. In so far as the world is indeed ruled by economic ideas, these
are often the intuitive ideas of lay people, rather than the more elaborate systems of
thought which occupy the minds of trained economists. The history of national
economic policies down the years beam witness not only to the influence of

economists, defunct or alive, but also to the power of what I call ‘do-it-yourself
economics’.
I first became aware of this phenomenon - which I may say came as a complete
surprise to me - in the late 1950s, when I spent a year on leave from Oxford
University, and went to work as an economic adviser in Her Majesty’s Treasury. This
was my first glimpse of economic policy-making from the inside. The experience
changed both my view of the world and the direction of my professional interests. I
want now to describe what happened, not because I intend to use these lectures as an
occasion for autobiography, but because it serves to introduce and illustrate my main
theme.
Macroeconomics and the Keynesian Ascendancy
I joined the Treasury at the beginning of September 1957. Up to that time, I had seen
no reason to doubt the essential truth of what Keynes had said about the relation
between economists’ ideas and government policies. After all, the very success of his
own ideas was evidence that he was right. In Britain, and increasingly in other
countries too, the Keynesian revolution had taken hold. Its doctrines had established
themselves with remarkable speed, not only within universities, but apparently also as
the basis for official policy. Like almost everyone in my generation of economists in
Britain, I approved of this and took heart from it. I assumed, as most of us did, that the
chief role of those economists who were interested in questions of policy, and who
wished to influence policy whether as officials within the government machine or as
commentators outside it, was to ensure that Keynesian ideas were further developed
and effectively put into practice.
For some time, what I saw and learned from my new vantage-point in Whitehall
served only to confirm these beliefs. In the Treasury I became one of a small group of
economists who made up what was then known as the Economic Section. All of us
were Keynesians, and very much aware of being so. Moreover, the subjects we were
concerned with, both in official memoranda and in our discussions with one another,
the terms of reference of the committees we served on, and indeed the very existence
of the Economic Section as such, all to my mind bore witness to Keynes’s vision of a
world shaped by ‘the gradual encroachment of ideas’. They were manifestations of
the Keynesian ascendancy.
On the intellectual side, the Keynesian revolution had led to the establishment of
macroeconomics as a leading, distinctive and unified branch of economic theory,
which it still remains. ‘Macro’ as distinct from ‘micro’ economics is concerned with
the properties and functioning of the economic system as a whole. in particular, it tries
to describe, explain and predict changes over time in output or production,
employment and unemployment, and the general price level. Its interest is largely in
the recent past, and in the not too distant future. If you wanted a professional answer
to the questions. What has been happening to the economy, and where is it going
now?’, it is to a macroeconomist that you would turn. These were precisely the main
questions that were put to us in the Economic Section, though we often dealt with
them as members of substantial teams of officials drawn not only from various parts
of the Treasury but also from other departments and from the Bank of England. It was
largely on macroeconomic issues that we were employed in the public service.

Applied macroeconomic work, then as now, covers a wide range of issues and topics.
These include public sector revenues and expenditures; the main elements of private
demand—that is, consumers’ expenditure and business investment; then there are
exports and imports; international financial flows, the balance of payments and the
exchange rate; there is the money supply, interest rates and financial markets; key
wage and salary negotiations; and last, though not least, the likely course and impact
of developments in the world economy generally. But in all this the focus of attention
is on the national economy as a whole—or in some cases, such as my own department
within the OECD, a group of national economies and their interactions within an
international system. Macroeconomics now is less identified with Keynes’s work than
it was in my far-off Treasury days, and there are deeper professional disagreements
within it; but its broad subject-matter and concerns remain much the same.
As to the practical connection between Keynesian macroeconomic theory and
government policies, this was officially established in Britain in the spring of 1944,
when the then wartime coalition government issued a White Paper under the title
‘Employment Policy’. The opening sentence, which today perhaps has rather a sad
ring about it read as follows: ‘The government accept as one of their primary aims
and responsibilities the maintenance of a high and stable level of employment after
the war’. Well, this aim was to be achieved by Keynesian means, through financial
policies designed to operate on and control the level of demand within the economy—
that is the flow of public and private expenditure. The chief single task of economic
policy was now conceived as being the management of demand. In the post-war years
this conception of policy and of the role of government was adopted by both the main
political parties, with no major differences between them. By the early 1950s the socalled ‘Keynesian consensus’ had been established, and it was to remain in place until
well into the 1970s.
One result of this wider economic role of government was to strengthen the power of
the Treasury, which was already the senior Whitehall department. To its traditional
functions the Treasury had now added the primary responsibility for policies affecting
the economy as a whole and in particular for the management of demand.
A second result was the establishment in a central position within the British official
machine of a small group of economists identified as such. Before 1939 no such
group had existed. But during the war a number of economists were brought into
Whitehall: Keynes himself was one of them. Some worked as professionals, mainly in
the Economic Section of the Cabinet Office which was created in 1941. Others were
assigned to more general administrative tasks. At the end of the war most of them left
the Civil Service, either to return to universities or to pursue other careers. (Among
these were Hugh Gaitskell and Harold Wilson, who both entered the House of
Commons in 1945.) Of those who stayed, some signed on as regular civil servants in
the Administrative Class. But a small handful, still identified as professionals,
remained in the Economic Section. For a while, their future was uncertain; but as time
went on, and financial and more especially budgetary policies became increasingly
the main single instrument of the government’s economic policy, they found an
accepted role. In 1953 the Economic Section was transferred from the Cabinet Office
to the Treasury. This placed it at the centre of the web of economic policymaking.

Now, macroeconomics is not the whole of economics, and there are questions of
economic policy on which it has little to contribute. But these aspects of theory and
policy receded into the background as a result of the Great Depression of the 1930s
and the Keynesian revolution. My own view of the world, at the time when I was still
a newcomer in Whitehall, was I think widely shared in the profession and by
informed people outside it. I thought that issues of macroeconomic policy were of
dominant importance; that dramatic advances had been made in the economic theory
which bore on these issues; and that thanks to the spread of Keynesian ideas within
official circles, together with increasing reliance on professional economic advice,
they were now handled with greater knowledge and competence than before, both in
Britain and in other developed industrial countries. I was well aware that there were
other questions in economics, that there existed (so to speak) a second tier of
economic issues, but my interests were very largely directed towards the first tier, the
world of macroeconomics. From observation of this world, I saw every reason to
believe that Keynes was right. It was indeed the ideas of economists, rather than
vested interests, which largely decided the choices that governments made.

Discovering DIYE
However, in the life of a temporary and junior civil servant fate was about to deal a
new hand. I mentioned earlier that in assuming the main responsibility for economic
management in Britain, the Treasury had enlarged its sphere its traditional functions
still remained, and these included the control and oversight of public expenditure.
Here the Treasury divisions concerned carried on an unceasing argument with the
various spending departments. Since our responsibilities and our professional interests
too, were very largely on the macroeconomic side, the Economic Section was not
much involved in this. But every now and then, when a regular Treasury administrator
felt that he needed some help, one of us would be asked to give an opinion or attend a
meeting. I was drawn into sonic of this work by accident; and I found it so interesting
that, with the agreement of my superiors, I decided to make it my main activity. In
particular, 1 attended the numerous—and often contentious—meetings of two highlevel interdepartmental committees that were appointed at this time to report to
Ministers on the future of major public expenditure programmes. One was concerned
with forestry, and the other with government support for the aircraft industry.
I now found myself in a different world, both administratively and intellectually. For
one thing, vested interests were involved in an obvious and indeed essential way. The
very make-up of the official committees, and the lines on which the argument was
conducted, were evidence of this. Those sitting around the table were there as the
accredited representatives of the departments and agencies that were interested
parties. Their role ‘was to articulate and defend either the interests of their own
organisations or those of outside groups for which departments acted as sponsors or
advocates within Whitehall. Officials appeared not as individuals, but as it were
wearing masks, like actors in a Greek drama. Moreover, for some of the interested
parties the stakes could be high: the Forestry Commission, for instance, felt at the
time—I think with justice—that its very survival might be in question.
Another difference was that the second tier of economics was involved. Here was
dealing with choices relating to particular expenditure programmes, and this meant
that I had to think about the general criteria, the yardsticks, that ought to be applied in

such choices. I had to go back to the microeconomic theory I had learnt as a student
and teacher, and set how it could best be brought to bear. As I did so, I was struck by
the fact that in this second tier of economic policy discussion, even more than in
macroeconomics, the aspects of the questions that an economist could handle from his
professional training alone were insufficient to provide the basis for informed
judgment. Much more than general economic reasoning was needed. Specialised facts
and figures, past history and current technology, a feel for roles and institutions, all
these were and are a necessary part of understanding. At the same time, standard
economic analysis was helpful, more so than I had expected. Lastly - and this
especially came as a surprise - the use of conventional economic ideas often set me
apart from other committee members, who revealed themselves as having quite
different ways of looking at economic aspects of the issues under review. This was
true not only of the other departments but sometimes of Treasury officials too.
Thinking of Keynes’s words, I asked myself where these committee-table ideas had
originated. They did not come from past university economics courses, which in any
case few of the officials concerned had attended. Nor were they derived from the
present-day writings of economists outside the official machine, if only because
Whitehall was—as it remains—very much a self-contained world, generating its own
information and ideas. (The brilliant Yes Minister series accurately conveys the
feeling of a private universe of Ministers and officials, where almost any outsider
appears as either a nuisance or a threat.) Finally, there were very few cases in which
these ideas could have been picked up from economists within the departments
concerned, since—as I now began to observe-units corresponding to the Economic
Section were rare outside the Treasury. It was apparent that economists, whether past
or present, inside or outside, simply were not involved. The doctrines I was now
encountering were intuitive and self-generated: those who held them thought that
what they were saying was plain common sense, which needed no prompting or
authority.
Well, I kept thinking about this discovery, both at the Treasury and after my return to
Oxford; and in the summer of 1960 1 wrote a paper on the subject. 1 called it ‘The
Use of Economists in British Administration’, but it was really about their non-use. I
cited for illustrative purposes four cases or areas in which British official policy
seemed to have been affected by rather crude economic reasoning; and I referred to
them as examples of ‘economic policy without economics I would now use a different
phrase. Economic considerations, as I pointed out in the article, had been present,
even dominant, in all four. But the economics which had been brought to bear was not
that of the professionals. What I had identified, and perceived as being widespread
and influential in Whitehall, was do-it- yourself economics (DIYE for short).
A Universal Empire of Ideas
Although it was in Her Majesty’s Treasury that I first came to appreciate the strong
persuasive influence that do-it-yourself economics can exert on politicians and their
advisers and indeed on public opinion in general, I soon realised that the Whitehall of
the late 1950s was far from being an unusual case. In fact, the leading ideas of DIYE
have a universal character: they can be seen across national frontiers and down the
centuries. They are unchanging, timeless, and often deeply held. They are the
economics of Everyman.

Now, from a historical point of view, the notion that economic policies can be chosen
and implemented without benefit of economists is not in the least surprising. After all,
there are issues of economic policy as old as human society, while economics as a
systematic body of thought dates only from the late 18th century. For better or for
wont, the various experts who advised rulers and governments in earlier times could
not have possessed the kind of expertise which an economic training is designed to
give. Their ways of thinking, and their perceptions of issues and events, were in this
sense pre-economic.
What is striking, however, is the prevalence today of very similar modes of thought for the do-it-yourself economics of 1985, like that of earlier periods, is essentially preeconomic. More than two centuries have passed since the publication of Adam
Smith’s great treatise The Wealth of Nations; and trained economists are now well
established, not just in universities and research institutes, but also in business
enterprises, Civil Services, and the councils of presidents and prime ministers. In
Whitehall, for example, the situation has been transformed since the days of my
bureaucratic apprenticeship. Yet DIYE has not become a curiosity of the past. All
over the world, ideas and beliefs which owe nothing to recognised economics
textbooks still retain their power to influence people and events.
This makes economics an unusual case. In most subjects which have become
established academic disciplines, the professionals have long since driven the
amateurs from the field. Uninstructed ‘pre-scientific’ notions, where they still survive,
are a fringe phenomenon without influence on serious opinion. But with economics,
even now, the situation often resembles a case which I came across some five years
ago in an article in the Wall Street Journal.
It concerned an American economist. William Niskanen, whom I had the pleasure of
meeting last year in Washington, by which time he had become a member of the
President’s Council of Economic Advisers. Then, however, he had just been
dismissed from his post as director of economics at the Ford Motor Company,
because he refused to accept or support the company’s plea for protection against
imports of cars from Japan. Commenting on the incident to the Wall Street Journal,
Niskanen described one aspect of his experience at Ford in words which I found
illuminating, though not at all surprising. He said that:
In contrast with their attitudes towards lawyers and engineers (whose
expertise is readily accepted), business managers are quick…to
override the judgments of economists on economic matters. Basically,
every senior manager and board member of Ford thinks of himself as
an economist, as having a democratic right to make his own judgment
about economic phenomena.
This account of executive life in Detroit, with every man his own economist,
describes a common situation. But I am going to add three riders.
Number one: this state of affairs is not peculiar to business: you will find it in
government and other walks of life. Number two: my distinction between the two tiers
of economic discourse has to be borne in mind. Economists are more often asked for
their views, and more readily listened to when they express them, on some topics than

on others. And, number three: in my experience it is not so much that the views of
economists are brusquely overridden by laymen, though this can happen. More often,
it simply does not occur to those who subscribe to intuitive economic ideas that there
might actually be an alternative view. In dealing with economic questions. their
typical state of mind is one of innocence.
I want now to consider the rather surprising persistence of pre-economic ways of
thought, and to suggest answers to the following groups of questions.
First, what are the characteristic features and doctrines of do-it-yourself economics?
How do they contrast with economists’ ways of analysing and assessing the same
issues? What are the implications for actual economic policies of adopting one
framework of thinking rather than the other?
Next, why is it that in some areas of policy the ideas of economists have little
persuasive power, while in others—to quote again the striking phrase that Keynes
used half a century ago—’it seems the world is ruled by little else’? Is this striking
divergence due to some branches of economics having made greater progress than
others? Alternatively, can it be explained by differences in the extent to which vested
interests, as distinct from ideas, influence what governments decide? Why have the
professionals been so unsuccessful in weakening the hold of do-it-yourself
economics, where its view of the world and theirs are in conflict?
And finally, how much does it mailer if DIYE continues to hold sway? Would the
world be a noticeably better place if more distinctively professional views, of the kind
I will be describing, carried greater weight than they do at present?
Presenting the Two Systems
My first task, then, is to sketch out the main ideas of do-it-yourself economics, and
show how and why they differ from the ideas of people like me. It is not easy to
present either of these two systems adequately and without distortion in what can only
be the barest outline. Each of them presents its own problem. In the case of do-ityourself economics there are naturally no manuals or textbooks to go by, so I have
used my own descriptive labels and categories, which are necessarily subjective. On
the other side of the fence, the main problem—notoriously—is that economists do not
speak with one voice: on many of the issues I will refer to the professionals are much
less united than the amateurs. Some of them simply are not concerned with the kinds
of question on which intuition and the standard university textbook are apt to diverge:
their expertise, and their professional interests, lie elsewhere in the subject. Others, on
some issues at any rate, would actually want to take the side of the amateurs have
described the characteristic state of mind of do-it-yourself economics as one of
innocence, and I think this is just; but a significant number of my professional
colleagues. in response to the arguments I am about to present, might be disposed to
remind me that in Hans Andersen’s story it was precisely the innocence of the child
which enabled him to see, and to say out loud, that the emperor had no clothes.
Let me emphasise, therefore, that the economists’ approach which I will outline
represents only one tendency, albeit an influential one, within a fragmented and
divided profession. I will call it the orthodox or establishment view, Its roots lie deep
in the history of economic thought, and a systematic economic training usually,
though not always, leads people either to accept it or at least to acknowledge its place

within the subject. But though distinctively professional it is viewed by some of the
professionals themselves with indifference, lack of enthusiasm or even active
hostility. I will return to these differences of opinion at a later stage.
Partly because of them, I do not put forward the orthodox view as the last word in
wisdom. Perhaps I can best indicate the spirit in which I present it now by referring to
a comic novel which was published in 1831. It is Crotchet Castle, by Thomas Love
Peacock and in it there appears an allegedly representative economist. Given the
period, he is naturally a Scotsman from Edinburgh, the city of David Flume and
Adam Smith. His name is Mr MacQuedy - Mac Q.E.D., the son of a demonstration—
and he represents the essence, the spirit, of political economy (as economics was then
called). In the same way as Peacock, though with more serious intent, I want to
convey the essence of a particular approach, a characteristic way of viewing and
assessing events. Accordingly, I imagine Mr MacQuedy restored to the scene, in
modern dress, with modern orthodox ideas, trying as ever to persuade us to see the
world through his eyes. Think of him, if you will, as the exponent and representative
of the orthodox economic doctrine of today, and of me in turn as his interpreter.
Now I should say straightaway that I am not conjuring up the ghost of Mr MacQuedy
in order to conceal or retreat from my own point of view. He and I largely agree: we
are members of the same club. Over the years, my working experience has led me to
draw closer to the establishment position; and in comparing it now with do-it-yourself
economics. I do not pretend to be impartial. But I want to distance myself a little from
him, leaving open the possibility that our views might not always coincide.
Let me add a further disclaimer. In these lectures I shall be concerned with the uses of
economics, and by implication therefore with the role of economists; and part of the
time I shall speak as an advocate. But I make no extravagant claims for my subject.
Like other experts, economists are sometimes inclined to be condescending in their
treatment of laymen but I believe that as a profession we have little to be
condescending about. The professional differences which are so apparent within
economics have a number of causes, but possibly the main single factor is that the
behaviour of economic systems is not well understood. In part, that is because these
systems are subject to a process of unceasing change which is unique in time: in the
enormously complex economic drama which is continuously being enacted, there are
some elements of regularity, but there are no repeat performances. Even if economists
were more agreed on what was likely to happen and why, this would not rule out the
possibility that future developments would challenge or discredit these accepted
views.
Partly, but by no means entirely because of this, economic policy—to adapt a wellknown saying—is too serious a matter to be left to economists. But equally, it seems
to me, economic policy is too serious a matter to be conducted without reference to
economists’ ideas; and this is the theme which Mr MacQuedy will be helping me to
develop in my next three lectures.

