REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 3: Needs, Centralism & Autarchy
TRANSMISSION: 20 November 1985 – Radio 4
Last week I showed my hand as the price mechanist that I am, and I argued, with the
help of my fictional colleague Mr MacQuedy that individual willingness to pay
should be the main test of how resources are used. You may recall that we made fun
of a number of soap-opera notions of do-h-yourself economics (DIYE). In this lecture
I want to enlarge on the contrast between DIYE and economic orthodoxy.
Twin aspects of unreflecting Centralism
I want to consider first an aspect of DIYE which I call unreflecting centralism. It has
two mutually supporting elements. One is the disposition to assume that outcomes
have to be planned and decided by governments. The second is the tendency to think
of governments and states as the principal or even the only actors on the economic
scene, and to attribute to them roles and functions which are not necessarily theirs.
A good example of this tendency appeared in a speech which I had the pleasure of
hearing in Brussels last year by the Irish Prime Minister, Dr Garret FitzGerald.
Interestingly, Dr FitzGerald is one of two Prime Ministers within the European
Community who count as professional economists, the other being the Prime Minister
of Greece, Dr Andreas Papandreou. In his speech he described himself engagingly as
‘an economist on leave’. Nevertheless, in reviewing the problems of the Community,
he advanced a prize specimen of unreflecting centralism.
For Dr FitzGerald there are two economic superpowers, the United States and Japan,
and, he argued: ‘attempts to compete on an equal basis in the economic sphere with
these superpowers by independent, individual action, are quite simply bound to fail.’
The moral drawn by Dr FitzGerald, in common with many other influential people, is
that the governments of the European Community must take concerted action to
strengthen the competitive position of the Community as a whole vis-à-vis the United
States and Japan.
This argument assumes that competition in the markets of the world is between states,
and that only large states can successfully engage in it. Both propositions are false.
Competition is largely between a multitude of business enterprises of all kinds, over a
wide range of products and markets. It is true that governments can influence the
outcome of the competitive process in various ways, and that particular business
enterprises can be owned or backed by governments. But even when this is allowed
for, it is not states that are generally the sole or the principal parties to the vast array
of individual transactions around the world in which the competitive process takes
shape.

As to large states being necessarily more successful on the contemporary economic
scene, this notion is hard to reconcile with the fact that in Europe it is two small
countries, Sweden and Switzerland, which by conventional tests are possibly the most
economically advanced. The products of Swedish and Swiss enterprises have for
decades competed successfully on world markets, without benefit of concerted
transnational ‘industrial strategies’ of the kind that are now so favoured in official and
business circles within the European Community. If we look outside Europe, and at
the growth of income per head and of exports to world markets, the outstanding
success stories of the past two decades are to be found among the developing
countries of East and South East Asia. Three of the most successful, Hong Kong,
Singapore and Taiwan, are small, while none of the group is very large. In any case, it
is not the governments of these countries, through concerted action among
themselves, that have achieved rapidly increasing shares in expanding world markets.
This has been the work of individual enterprises—helped, it should be said, by
government policies which have provided an environment in which enterprises could
grow and flourish, but which have not been based on the mistaken assumption that
competition on world markets is largely between states.
Let me quote another official instance of an- reflecting centralism, which will take us
back into energy policy. A few years ago, in an interesting letter to The Times about
the United Kingdom nuclear power programme, a former senior British government
official, Peter Vinter, observed that ‘as a nation we have not yet succeeded in setting
up an effective nuclear reactor construction company’. I think his point is a fair one,
and perhaps he would say the same today. But why should it be the collective
responsibility of ‘we as a nation’ to establish a nuclear reactor construction company?
Why should such a company, if indeed there is a place for it, not emerge from the
impersonal competitive selection process of markets, without benefit of high-level
official committees?
The history of British nuclear power programmes over the past 30 years provides a
depressing example of unreflecting centralism in action—stoutly reinforced, I may
add, by other forms of DIYE. One aspect of this centralism is the idea, which has
been embraced by successive British governments of both parties that a choice has to
be made at Cabinet level of one particular reactor system for future nuclear power
stations in Britain. Here, for instance, is Mr David Howell giving evidence to a House
of Commons Select Committee in 1980, when he was Secretary of State for Energy
under Mrs Thatcher: ‘...We must develop a sound thermal reactor strategy,’ he said,
‘we are virtually the only major industrialised country without a chosen reactor
system available for series ordering…we cannot continue to run two systems
indefinitely….’
Here again it is ‘we as a nation’, with Her Majesty’s Government as agent, that has to
decide these things. In Mr Howell’s world, in the world of his predecessors and his
successors and their official advisers, no other practical possibility exists. It has been
taken for granted, whatever the party in office, that the Secretary of State for Energy,
or indeed the Cabinet itself, must determine the size of the nuclear power programme,
the choice of reactor and the appropriate structure for the nuclear industry.
But, in fact, there are other ways of handling these issues. A few years ago an
interesting article made me aware of how nuclear power had developed in

Switzerland. The title of the article, significantly, was ‘How Switzerland has
benefited from the market approach’. At the time when it appeared, there were four
nuclear reactors in operation within Switzerland, at three different power stations.
The choice of reactors, as of other systems and equipment in the stations, was made
not by the federal government but by the individual utilities concerned, which are
small by British standards, since the Swiss electricity supply industry is much more
decentralised. Two different reactor systems have been chosen and are in operation.
According to the article, ‘the four operating nuclear units were built in remarkably
good time and within their original cost budget’ - an achievement, I might add, which
is in marked contrast with British results over the past two decades. As to operating
performance, a recent comparative table shows the load factors achieved around the
world by 232 nuclear reactors. Taking cumulative performance over the whole
operating lives of these reactors, the best of the Swiss quartet was ranked third out of
the 232, while the worst was placed at 29th.
Essentialism at the National Level
One reason for centralism, which applies in energy policy and a number of other
fields, is the uncritical acceptance of what I called last week essentialist ideas. In the
case of energy, each country is perceived as having needs which must he met, and
each national government as having an inescapable responsibility to anticipate and
provide for these needs. In the more rustic treatments of these questions, reference is
made to a possible ‘energy gap’ which the government has to ensure is bridged. Even
in more sophisticated official presentations, governments usually appear as
indispensable providers. Here again is David Howell, as Secretary of State for
Energy:
The Government must ensure that we have enough energy in the
future to heat our homes and to power our industries. Failure to
achieve this could mean lower living standards for us all and a very
severe constraint on our society.
So essentialism leads naturally to unreflecting centralism. Also here in its place on the
DIYE stage is Mr Micawber’s dichotomy: either we-as-a-nation have enough energy
or we do not. But who is to say how much is enough? You will search in vain in
official White Papers and statistical publications for figures showing national energy
needs, for the simple reason that the concept can be neither defined nor measured. If
you ask someone who uses the term, what are the current or prospective energy needs
of the United Kingdom, the only answer you will get is a figure which relates to
demand—in other words, to actual or prospective purchases of energy products.
Demand is identified with needs, for no better reason than that energy, like food, is
cast in the soap-opera script as essential.
This takes no account of the fact that not all purchases of a product or service are of
equal value to those who make them. To class all energy purchases indiscriminately
as essential is to miss the point that most transactions take place at the margin; and at
the margin energy products, like other products, are generally valued by people and
by businesses at the prices which they show themselves as willing to pay for them.
And there is a simple proof to hand: purchases of energy respond to changes in
relative prices, which they would not if they were literally requirements that had to be

met. Between 1973 and 1983 the real national product of the United Kingdom—in
other words, the total output of goods and services—rose by something like ten per
cent. If there were indeed national requirements for energy in any literal sense, these
would no doubt have risen somewhat in response. But over these ten years estimated
inland energy consumption actually fell, by more than ten per cent. This, of course,
was not because the government failed in its supposed duty as provider, but largely
because energy prices rose considerably in relation to other prices. The pattern of
expenditure changed accordingly, reflecting individual decisions based on willingness
to pay.
Now at this point I fancy I bear the groans from some of my professional colleagues.
Henderson, they are saying, is wasting the Reith Lectures labouring points which are
familiar to every first-year economics student, and are not important anyway. Well, as
to importance, I shall let the evidence that I have presented and will present, speak for
itself. As to familiarity, I would make two responses to the critics: first, they are badly
out of touch with first-year economics students; and second, they should note that
intuitive economic ideas have cast their spell not only on our eminent professional
colleague, Dr FitzGerald, but also on Mr Howell, who himself has a First Class
degree in Economics.
The Goal of Autarchy
Both in the energy field and elsewhere, essentialist ideas lend support to another
aspect of DIVE, the belief that autarchy, or national self-sufficiency, is an important
goal. Here is a recent illustration from the European Commission in Brussels. The
Commissioner for Industry, Karl Heinz Narjes, was quoted as saying that: ‘Current
Commission policy seeks to encourage food self-sufficiency in developing countries
as the only reliable long-term solution to their needs.’
The idea that it is important for developing countries to become self-sufficient in food
is widely and uncritically accepted, not just in Brussels; but from the orthodox
economic standpoint it is without foundation. There is no magic accession of strength
that a country derives from reducing imports of food to zero, whether for individual
commodities or across the whole range. Hong Kong has developed over the past three
decades as rapidly perhaps as any country in history. It is at present dependent on
imports for approximately seven- eighths of its food consumption. There is no reason
to suppose that it would have gained in the past, or would gain in the future, from
deliberate official attempts to bring down this ratio, while 100 per cent selfsufficiency would be absurdly costly. Neither in Hong Kong nor anywhere else does
it make sense to specify as an aim of policy, on the basis of soap-operatic intuition
alone, a particular ratio of domestic production to total consumption. This
generalisation applies to all products, including food, arid to all countries, whether
rich or poor.

Security within the National Fortress?
For some people, this statement of orthodox economic doctrine may appear too
unqualified, since it fails to mention explicitly security of supply. Often, though not
always, the case for self-sufficiency is argued with reference to a country’s need to
ensure security by minimising dependence on foreign sources. The outside world is
seen at best as unreliable and subject to instability, at worst as actively hostile. From

this ‘fortress-mentality’ standpoint, autarchy appears to be common prudence. Two
sets of measures then suggest themselves: one is to build up domestic production of
essentials so as to reduce imports to a minimum; the other is to restrict exports, so as
to ensure that domestic supplies are available for domestic use.
Not surprisingly, the tendency to think in these terms has been strengthened in recent
years by developments on international energy markets, and in particular by the two
oil crises of 1973-4 and 1979-80. Here, for example, is the then President of the
United States, Richard Nixon, in an Address to the Nation in November 1973,
launching the programme known as ‘Project Independence’:
Let us set as our national goal...that by the end of this decade we will
have developed the potential to meet our own energy ‘needs’ without
depending on any foreign sources.
Again, the American ‘Energy Security Act’ of 1980 laid down a specific programme
for reducing dependence on imported oil, through the production of ‘at least 500,000
barrels of crude oil per day of synthetic fuel by 1987’. Also in 1980, following the
second oil crisis, the then (Liberal) government of Canada adopted a comprehensive
National Energy Programme. One of the ‘three precepts for federal action’ underlying
it was stated as being to: ‘...establish the basis for Canadians to seize control of their
own energy future through security of supply and ultimate independence of the world
market’.
Well, what is the orthodox economist’s response to these arguments, and to the
policies based on them? Mr MacQuedy would agree that the question of security of
supply has to be faced, by governments as well as by other agents within an economy,
and that it may well be worth while to incur some extra cost at the margin to achieve
a higher degree of security. But Mr MacQuedy does not share the fortress mentality,
nor does he think much of the kinds of autarchic measures that are prompted by it.
One reason for scepticism is the eventual fate of the energy policies that were
launched in response to the oil crises of the 1970s. Who now remembers ‘Project
Independence’? In 1973, the year in which it was launched with such fanfare, the
estimated share of United States energy consumption supplied by domestic sources
was 85 per cent. In 1980, when the authors of ‘Project Independence’ had envisaged
that it would be approaching 100 per cent, it was in fact 86 per cent. As for the 1980
US synthetic fuel target, of 500,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day by 1987, the
likely outcome in that year is something very much lower possibly 10,000 or 15,000
barrels per day; and this is fortunate, because if the target had been reached, the costs
involved would have been inordinately high. The Canadian National Energy
Programme of 1980 no longer exists as such; the aim of isolating Canada from world
energy markets has been abandoned.
It is true that such failures and reversals of policy are partly due to the fact that
governments, like individuals, can easily misjudge the future course of events. But
even if economic change were more predictable, there would remain basic objections
from the orthodox point of view to the kinds of autarchic policies which are
associated with essentialism and the fortress mentality.

In particular, it is wrong to think of security of supply in essentialist terms. Security
of supply is not a separate dimension of choice: it is one of the economic aspects.
Like other features of the quality of a purchase, such as reliability in service, it has a
value; and the best indication of this value is willingness to pay at the margin. This
can easily be seen in those markets where buyers are offered a free choice between
interruptible and non-interruptible supply contracts; and, more generally,
considerations of security do affect decisions about how far ahead to make
commitments, and what sort of contracts to sign. Just as there are no precisely defined
‘national needs’ that have to be met regardless of cost, so there are no overriding
requirements for uninterrupted supply which can be identified in central
bureaucracies and used as a basis for policies.
Exports, Willingness to Pay, and International Markets
To see where this argument leads, let us consider export prohibitions. According to
do-it- yourself economics, these are called for in the case of products that are both
essential and scarce. British policies toward North Sea nil and gas provide an
illustration. Governments have consistently ruled out exports of gas, on the grounds
that estimated reserves are too limited: in this case, scarcity is viewed as chronic. By
contrast, exports of crude oil are generally unrestricted, though subject to licence; it is
clear, however, that freedom to export is liable to be curtailed in periods of shortage.
Just before the general election of 1979 the then Secretary of State for Energy, Tony
Benn, was reported as having reacted to news that an oil company operating in the
North Sea ‘had seriously considered cutting back on supplies in Britain and selling
the surplus at higher prices in Europe’. His reaction was: ‘to ask the chairmen of all
the major oil companies operating here to give him their personal assurances that they
were not taking advantage of the general oil shortage in this way’.
Shortly afterwards, it was reported of Mr Benn’s Conservative successor, David
Howell, that he had ‘started a discreet but forceful squeeze on North Sea oil
companies to keep more of their production at home’. The squeeze had to be discreet,
since formal restrictions might well have been hard to reconcile with obligations
which Britain has assumed as a member both of the European Community and of the
International Energy Agency. But it could nevertheless be forceful, since an oil
company that failed to respond might prejudice its chances of success in the next
round of applications for North Sea licences. The situation has not changed since
those early days of Mrs Thatcher’s Prime Ministership. If another oil crisis arose,
ways would probably be found, whatever government was in power, to safeguard the
principle laid down by Mr Howell in a speech of June 1979, that ‘the interests of
British consumers must come first’.
In cases like oil and gas it is considered irrelevant that exports might command a
higher price than domestic sales: prohibitions should still apply. Indeed, Hamish
Gray, who at the time was Conservative Minister of State at the Department of
Energy, was reported a few years ago as having committed himself, while speaking of
a particular North Sea gasfield, to the remarkable statement that ‘Britain would not
consider selling its share of the Statfjord gas whatever price a foreign buyer might
offer’.
This conception of national interest is not shared by Mr MacQuedy. For him, the test
of willingness to pay at the margin does not cease to hold good just because national

frontiers are involved. How much particular exports are worth to the economy
depends on the value of the imports for which they can be exchanged, which in turn
depends on how much foreigners are prepared to pay for them. Why should domestic
consumers of the product concerned be given unlimited preference or indeed any
preference at all? Successive British governments have rejected any suggestion that in
normal circumstances domestic consumers should pay less than the world price for
North Sea oil. And the existence of a shortage does not affect the logic that underlies
this non-discriminatory policy. Suppose, for example, that oil will fetch $100 a barrel
on the international market. Then the value to the economy of a barrel of oil sold on
[hat market is $100. since this is what domestic consumers in general would be
willing to pay for the imports that it makes possible. If this amount is more than
anyone at home is willing to pay for the oil, then prima facie the balance of advantage
lies in exporting it. In general export prohibitions only serve to ensure that oil, gas,
scrap metal, soya beans, or whatever the commodity may be, is put to lower-value
rather than higher- value use. Freedom to export should be the rule.
This argument still applies, moreover, to the case where there are limited domestic
reserves of some non-renewable resource, as with gas from the UK Continental Shell.
In Britain, the oil companies rightly argue that freedom to export gas from the North
Sea would increase the incentive to find new deposits of gas there. This is not,
however, the fundamental point, which is that even in a situation where reserves were
known and limited, the orthodox argument would still apply: if foreigners are willing
to pay more at the margin, then exports represent a higher-value use. The present and
long- established restrictions on the export of gas from the UK are therefore not
justified.
Arguing in this way is not myopic: longer-term national gains would not be sacrificed
to immediate profit. It may well be that oil and gas will be so much more valuable in
the future, even allowing for the interest factor that has to be taken into account in
such calculations, that governments should limit production now, and possibly also
encourage imports in order to conserve domestic resources for the future. This is quite
consistent with the orthodox economists’ approach, because if the assumption is
correct, the effect of such conservation measures would be to substitute a future
higher-value use for a present lower- value one. But the case for giving more weight
to the future, and less to the present does not in any way make a case for
discriminating in favour of domestic consumers as against foreigners.
Let me add that, as in other applications of the willingness-to-pay criterion, freedom
to export is a general presumptive rule, not a categorical imperative which admits of
no exceptions. Restrictions on particular strategic exports may well be justified on
grounds of national defence. Taxes on commodity exports, which have the effect of
reducing their flow, can in some circumstances be a useful instrument of policy in
developing countries. Again, restrictions on food exports are justified in genuine
national emergencies, as in some African countries at present, even though in
themselves such restrictions will not give those in need the wherewithal to obtain
food. All these, however, are exceptional or fringe cases in the modern world. They
do not undermine the general orthodox argument that export restrictions based on
essentialist ideas are contrary to the interests of a country that imposes them.

Security, International Markets, and Reserve Stocks
What about the second type of autarchic policy, that of minimising dependence on
imports? Here the orthodox view is more sympathetic, since it is obvious that serious
consequences can result if a major international source of supply for key commodities
like oil or gas is suddenly withdrawn or disrupted. But do-it- yourself economics,
here as elsewhere, is no help. It leads people and governments both to exaggerate the
risk and to use inappropriate ways of dealing with it.
On the first point, there is a chronic DIYE tendency to overstate the dangers of using
overseas sources of supply. In part, this is because of the mistaken essentialist belief
about national needs. Another reason is that unreflecting centralism conjures up a
picture in which imports are always bought directly from chronically unreliable
foreign governments. More typically, however, it is not governments but business
enterprises which ship the imports; and whether publicly or privately owned, these
enterprises have an interest both in retaining profitable markets and in keeping their
reputation for honouring contracts. Of course, interruptions to imported supplies may
none the less take place. But as British energy consumers need hardly be reminded
after the recent coal strike, domestic supplies may also be subject to interruption and
threats. Whether foreign sources are less reliable than domestic sources will depend
on the circumstances. It cannot just be presumed.
On this question of security, orthodox economics has a strong positive message,
which comes in two parts. In the first place, it points to the role of broad, wellfunctioning international markets as a means to reducing uncertainty and providing
for emergencies. The existence of such markets, with free access for buyers and
sellers, provides the best assurance that purchases can always be made -an assurance
which is reduced if countries resort to export prohibitions. The second part of the
message is that in the case of storable commodities like oil, security can be improved,
often at much lower cost than by substituting home production for imports, by the
holding of ample reserve stocks. These stocks can be private, or they can be official,
as in the case of the present US Strategic Petroleum Reserve: Mr MacQuedy has no
prejudice against government action on these lines.
These two parts of the message are not distinct; for unless markets are allowed to
function properly, the level of stocks will be lower than it should be. Holding stocks
costs money. Why should any private agency go to the expense of keeping special
emergency stocks, except perhaps for its own exclusive use, if it believes that in the
event of a shortage the government will at once impose price controls to prevent socalled profiteering, and possibly also make supplies available from its own stocks at
controlled prices? If stocks are to play their full potential role in providing insurance
against emergencies, markets have to be allowed to set prices freely and sales from
government strategic stocks should be made by auction.
This orthodox message is a general one. But it is especially relevant in the energy
field, because it is here in particular that risks are inevitable and the possible
consequences of disturbance are still serious. Over the past decade or more, Western
governments have taken action, individually and collectively, both to reduce
dependence on imported oil and to provide for an emergency should it arise. In
particular, they have made considerable progress, some of it quite recent, in freeing
internal markets for energy products. Where they have failed to act, largely because

of the dominance of mistaken economic notions, is in establishing and making
acceptable the principle that even in times of perceived scarcity, energy markets
should be allowed to function freely and prices should reflect willingness to pay.
Because of this failure, the risk of another energy crisis is greater than it need be the
possible consequences more alarming. The contribution of markets to security is still
unrecognised.

