REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 4: Orthodox Economists Versus the People
TRANSMISSION: 27 November 1985 – Radio 4

Viscount Falkland: Is it more basic than that?... Is this not a basic academic point
which economists seem to have which is totally at odds with the view held by people
in the practical business of creating wealth in this country which has to be resolved?
Mr. Withers: Yes, I think so.
Chairman: Not all economists, to be fair. I think it is only some of them.
(Minutes of evidence taken before the House of Lords Select Committee on Overseas
Trade, 26 March 1985)
The gulf between orthodox economic thinking and the intuitive notions of doltyourself economics is widest in the sphere of international economic relations in
genera], and trade policies in particular. The professionals, and those who think like
them, are very much in a minority. Perhaps the sharpest difference between minority
and majority is in their respective conceptions of where national interests lie in
international trade.
How to Break Rules Discreetly
Let me illustrate this first with reference to official policies towards exports. This is a
subject on which DIYE is ambivalent. As I mentioned in my last lecture, it considers
that for products which are labelled as essential, such as oil or gas in situations of
perceived scarcity, exports should be prohibited however much foreigners are
prepared to pay for them. But more typically, it takes the opposite view, that exports
represent a benefit to the economy even if foreigners are only prepared to pay less
than it costs to produce them. Essentialism fades into the background. Instead, the
dominant idea is that of traditional mercantilism— the centuries-old belief that any
reduction in imports or increase in exports will necessarily benefit the economy by
improving the balance of payments and creating or safeguarding employment.
In consequence, DIYE thinking favours the use of export subsidies, both direct and
indirect. But as in the case of export restrictions on oil, various international
agreements to which Britain is a party place limits on the extent to which such
subsidies can be used. There are provisions of the Treaty of Rome which apply to
members of the European Community; there are the relevant articles of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the GAIT); and there is an OECD agreement which
lays down guidelines for the use of official export credits.
Here again, therefore, a conflict of interest is seen as arising. The DIYE assessment is
that the parties to the various agreements stand to gain if all of them observe the rules,
but that each one would benefit from freedom to depart from the rules on its own.
Hence each country’s interest is thought to lie in using export subsidies to the fullest
extent that it judges advantageous, short of breaking international agreements in a
way that would give rise to countervailing or retaliatory actions by other

1

governments. The same holds good in relation to protective measures against imports,
such as tariffs, quotas, and subsidies or preferences to domestic producers. The art of
statesmanship is thought to lie in exploiting every protective device that comes to
hand, in stretching or even evading internationally agreed rules, without actually
breaking them.
Let me give you some examples of current interventionist trade policies, both
promotional and protectionist. The examples are mostly British, but this is not
because Britain stands out especially in these matters.
Export Subsidies
On the promotional side, the main form of direct and officially approved subsidies to
exporters in Britain (as in other industrial countries) is the provision of official export
financing at what are in effect subsidised rates. This applies mainly to capital goods
exports and construction contracts, where terms of project financing may be just as
important as price and quality of the bid in winning a contract. Export credits are
made available at fixed rates of interest which are generally below market rates, while
the official premiums for insurance against default are below what the private market
would charge. Further and substantial possibilities for subsidy can arise under socalled ‘mixed credit’ arrangements. Such arrangements chiefly apply to exports to
developing countries that qualify for official aid from the exporting country. Part of
the export deal is then financed from aid funds which are made available either in
grant form or at low rates of interest, and which are tied to procurement in the donor
country. In Britain such low-cost official financing is provided under the Aid and
Trade Provision, established in 1977 by the then Labour government and enlarged by
its successor. A recent case in point was the decision of Ministers to extend British aid
funding to Thailand, in order to reduce the cost of a major package of equipment and
supplies on offer to the Bangkok Mass Transit Authority.
In addition, direct subsidies to exports are also given by some authorities, in particular
the US government and the European Commission, to make possible the sale abroad
of agricultural products from embarrassingly large official stocks.
Official subsidies to exports may be indirect as well as direct. When a domestic
subsidy is given to a firm or an industry or an activity, this will at the same time serve
as a means of promoting exports and of giving protection against imports. In Britain,
numerous official schemes have this dual effect: two examples are the special
assistance that has been given in various ways to the shipbuilding industry, and the
financial aid extended to tourist projects under section four of the Development of
Tourism Act 1969.
Official Suasion
Let me now turn to measures which are more directly and exclusively protectionist.
One aspect of current protectionism is that official pressure is brought to bear on
businesses to limit imports and buy British. In the North Sea, for example, the
Offshore Supplies Office, financed from public funds, is described as ‘responsible to
the Secretary of State for Energy for ensuring the maximum involvement of UK
manufacturers, consultants, contractors and service companies in the provision of
supplies and services to the offshore hydrocarbon industry’. Now officially, the
government cannot insist that preference should be given to British suppliers: this

2

would be Inconsistent with the Treaty of Rome, and indeed with other agreements.
However, the Department of Energy is able to ensure that preferences are given none
the less, since in deciding which applicants shall receive discretionary licences to
operate in the North Sea the Secretary of State takes into account the companies’
performance with respect to the local content of their purchases. Formal decency is
preserved, since the relevant legislation refers only to ‘providing full and fair
opportunity to UK industry’: no one can object to that. But in practice it is the fullness
of the opportunity, rather than the fairness, that is stressed.
Other victims of official arm-twisting are the British subsidiaries of overseas vehicle
firms. Both the Ford Motor Company of Britain and Vauxhail Motors have been
pressed to raise the local content of their sales and purchases. A related case is that of
Nissan. The agreement which the company has signed with the Department of Trade
and Industry, relating to its establishment of a manufacturing plant in Britain, includes
provisions as to the local content of the company’s purchases. Late last year a senior
official of the Department, Sir Anthony Rawlinson, was questioned before a House of
Lords Select Committee on what such a clause in an agreement actually meant: did
‘local’ refer to the United Kingdom only, or to the Community as a whole? With what
may have been injudicious candour, Sir Anthony replied: it depends. We do not
always put it in. In the case of Nissan, we meant in the UK.’
In the printed record, this response is accompanied by an explanatory footnote. Let
me read you this pearl of Whitehall prose, as a demonstration of how to reposition a
fig leaf that has slipped:
The definition of local content encompasses components originating
throughout the EEC, but it is the joint objective of the company and of
the Department that the project should contribute to the development of
long-term collaboration with local component and other supplying
industries. There is every hope that, subject to the competitive
capabilities of United Kingdom industry, a majority of the local content
will in practice be British.
What the footnote really means is that the government will lean on Nissan, in the
same way that it leans on Ford and Vauxhall, to buy British—without too much
regard for what is in the Treaty of Rome.
Departmental Protectionism
Besides influencing the conduct of private businesses, the present British government
has likewise followed the example of its predecessors in operating its own direct
protectionist policies. Examples are the close control exercised by the Department of
Energy over coal imports, and—as it would now appear—over proposed imports of
cheap electricity from France. But the most important aspect of direct public sector
protectionism is procurement policy, and the long-established convention that
nationalised industries and government departments should so far as possible buy
British. It is almost invidious to take one example and not another; but the flavour is
admirably conveyed in a news item which appeared a few years ago, and which casts
a revealing light on the present government’s often-expressed concern with getting
value for money in public expenditure:

3

The government has assured the clothing industry that it will continue
to press its ‘Buy British’ policy in its purchasing programme. The
British Clothing Industry Association sought this official response
because it feared some public authorities were buying the cheapest
goods in the market.

MFA and other VERs
In Britain as elsewhere, a now widely prevalent form of protectionism is that of
discriminatory import restrictions. Among the most prominent are the import quotas
embodied in the Multi- Fibre Arrangement (MFA). The MFA, which dates from
1974, is an elaborate and detailed set of provisions for regulating the course of
international trade in textiles and clothing. Under its umbrella, Britain alone is at
present a party to some 500 bilateral quota agreements with 27 exporting countries. A
recent addition to the list will give you an idea of what is involved: there is a new
quota on ‘men’s and boys’ shirts, of cotton, man-made textile fibres, of wool or of
fine animal hair’ exported from Bangladesh. The agreement was made between the
European Commission, acting on behalf of the UK, and the government of
Bangladesh. The quota for this year was set at 2,200,000 shins, with a slightly higher
figure for 1986.
The exporting countries which have quotas within MFA are either developing
countries, including India, Hong Kong and South Korea, or East European socialist
countries. On the importing side are most of the Western industrial countries,
including the European Community, the United States and Canada. It is worth noting
that Japan, which is often portrayed as strikingly illiberal and restrictive in its
treatment of imports, has no quotas on imports of textiles and clothing manufactures.
All the importing countries which are parties to the MFA are also members of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the GATT; and under GATT rules, import
quotas which discriminate between exporting countries are not permitted. How then is
it possible for the highly discriminatory quotas of the MEAL to be applied? The
answer is that formally the restrictions are not applied by the importing countries.
Rather than openly breaking the GATT rules, countries like Britain have made
agreements with the governments of particular exporting countries, by which those
countries themselves accept the responsibility for restricting exports.
This same principle, of discriminatory import restrictions imposed maintained and in
part enforced from the exporting end, is now widely applied through what are known
as Voluntary Export Restraint Agreements (VERs). Some of these are official, on a
government to government basis, like the 1983 agreement between the European
Commission and the government of Japan which provided for precise quantitative
limits on Japanese exports of videocassette recorders to the European Community.
Others are unofficial, made on an industry to industry basis, though few if any of
these unofficial agreements could be made without government approval. Most VERs
apply to manufactured products. The exporting country chiefly affected is Japan, but
various agreements have also been negotiated with East European countries and with
a number of developing countries, notably Brazil, Korea and Taiwan. In the case of
certain steel products, the European Community itself has reluctantly agreed, after

4

long and difficult negotiations, to place voluntary limits on exports to the United
States.
Why do the various exporting countries, whether in MFA or in these other VER5,
agree to accept and operate quotas? One consideration is that the alternative may look
worse. When it went along with the quotas on steel exports to the US, the European
Commission was reported as: ‘...forced to choose between agreeing an acceptable
package or facing a complete ban on any further exports and imposing retaliatory
trade restrictions on the US’.
A further point is that firms in the exporting countries do well out of the quota
arrangements. II, for example, and this is the present situation, exports of Japanese
cars to Britain are restricted to 11 per cent of the market, then these cars can be sold
here at a higher price than if there were no restriction. Who gets the benefit of the
price difference will depend on how imports are restricted. Since in this instance as in
other VERs the restrictions are imposed in the exporting country, rather than being
operated by the British government through a tariff or a quota of its own, the gains
from the higher prices accrue mainly to the Japanese firms involved. The effect is
broadly the same as if the British government had imposed a tariff on these vehicles,
collected the revenue from the tariff, and then disbursed the whole amount in cheques
made out to Toyota, Nissan and the other Japanese firms involved. The present
government has been greatly concerned about inflation—too much so, in the eyes of
some of its critics. Yet it has followed the example of its predecessors, both Labour
and Conservative, in embracing trade measures which artificially raise a wide range
of product prices, and which cause a substantial part of the resulting gains to be made
abroad rather than at home.
The Prevalence of Interventionism
The array of interventionist trade measures which I have described in barest outline is
explained, in Britain as elsewhere, by a combination of influences on governments.
Naturally, interest groups and lobbies are an ever-present and often powerful
influence. Both jobs and profits are seen to be at stake, and well- orchestrated
pressures are continuously brought to bear in all the areas of policy that I have
mentioned. Almost always, these pressures are directed towards a greater degree of
intervention in favour of domestic producers, whether through protection against
imports or by promotion of exports. Except for consumers’ organisations, and now
and then businesses directly affected by restrictive trade measures, there are no
lobbies for free trade. Even in prosperous times the interventionist pressures are
strong and persistent. They are naturally intensified at times of high unemployment.
Depression raises the stakes.
However, the activity of pressure groups is not the only factor involved: if it were,
trade policies would now be, and would always have been, highly and unvaryingly
interventionist. To influence events, the lobbies usually have to persuade others, who
do not themselves stand to gain from what is proposed that their cause has merit. In
the famous passage which I quoted at the beginning of these lectures, Keynes
considered whether it was vested interests or the ideas of economists which decided
events. But in relation to trade policies, and I think in other areas toe, both ideas and
interests count, especially when they join forces. It is when pressure groups can draw
support from widely accepted economic ideas, which as I have stressed need not be

5

those of economists, that their campaigns are most likely to achieve results. This is the
situation that prevails with respect to trade policies in many, perhaps most, countries
today.
One reason for outside support of pleas for protection and subsidies is the feeling that
it is only fair. This indeed is the official ground for many of the current British import
restrictions, including those within the Multi-Fibre Arrangement: they are designed to
prevent unacceptable ‘social disruption’; and this is defined with reference to the
economic losses which unregulated foreign competition would bring to workers and
owners in specific industries. Overseas competition is seen as creating hard luck
cases, and the government is seen as having a duty to help.
Orthodox economics recognises this argument, but is concerned that too much weight
should not be given to it. For one thing, the hard luck cases are not necessarily the
poorest people, who may on the contrary suffer most from higher prices of electricity
(for example) or of lower grade textile and clothing items. I doubt whether the shirts
from Bangladesh which Her Majesty’s Government has been so concerned to restrict,
would have been sold through Harrods. Again, it can be argued as I noted in my
second lecture, that issues of poverty and need should be dealt with mainly through
the social security system, and not by ad hoc handouts and concessions. Moreover, the
argument for intervention on these grounds is logically an argument for slowing down
all change in the interests of minorities who would be better off without it. Everyone
appreciates that the introduction of new products and processes helps to further
economic progress and no one seriously suggests that it should be stopped or
restricted by law simply because it almost always harms the interest of some
particular groups. But new possibilities for trade, which arise continually from the
process of economic change at home and abroad, create exactly the same potential for
progress. The fact is that there is no better reason for keeping out low-cost imports
than there is for hindering the adoption of low-cost technologies.
The Mercantilist Rationale
Apart from considerations of fairness, interventionist trade measures are largely
justified within DIYE, and in the eyes of governments and public opinion alike, by
arguments about which I have so far said little. Soap operatics and unreflecting
centralism have supporting parts but the main role is played by other elements, One of
these, naturally enough, is traditional mercantilism. Today’s mercantilists, just like
their predecessors, assume that specific jobs saved by import restrictions, or created
by subsidised export deals, represent net additions to total employment. They rest
their case on the kind of partial evidence that so impressed President McKinley in the
1890s. As one of his biographers put it: ‘The great protected industries which he saw
from his train window in travelling from Ohio to Washington assured him that he was
right.’
For orthodox economics, however, this is only part of the story. Mr MacQuedy does
not question the reality of the view from today’s train window, but he’s equally
concerned with related developments that are not so noticeable. In his conception of
the economic system as a whole, the net effect on the balance of trade and on the level
of employment of interventionist trade measures is slight and not necessarily positive.
If there is any net positive impact, it is both limited and short-term. The visible

6

employment gains in favoured sectors of the economy are offset by consequential
though less visible losses elsewhere.
On this issue, orthodoxy and intuition are far apart. Let me try to convey why I
believe Mr MacQuedy is right, by listing some ways in which trade interventionism
favouring one sector of the economy can be damaging to others:
•

•

•

•
•
•

Import restrictions like voluntary export restraint agreements raise prices to
domestic consumers, and this leaves them with less to spend on other
products;
Subsidies to exports and to particular industries have to be financed from
taxation, which leaves taxpayers with less to spend; and taxpayers also suffer
if government procurement policies give preference to high-cost domestic
producers;
Restrictions on imports used by businesses. such as cotton yarn from Hong
Kong or forklift trucks from Japan, raise costs to the firms concerned, and
make it harder for them to compete: and you get the same result if you force
firms to increase the local content of their purchases;
If protected or subsidised firms can obtain labour or finance more easily, their
competitive position is stronger in relation to other firms within the economy;
If imports from particular countries are held down, this in Uirn reacts on
exports to those coun tries, and on opportunities for exporters;
If strong and widespread trade interventionism is effective in reducing
expenditure on imports and raising export receipts, this is likely to cause the
exchange rate to be higher than it would otherwise have been.

For some or all of these reasons, the relative importance of which will vary from case
to case in ways that can only be partly traced, the sectors which are not favoured by
restrictions and subsidies will suffer. This argument would apply even if
interventionist measures never provoked imitative or retaliatory action on the
part of other countries, which in fact they often do. The invariable though little
recognised effect of ad hoc import restrictions, export subsidies, and subsidies of
other kinds to domestic producers of traded goods is to weaken the position of the
firms and industries that can compete without such assistance. This is not a recipe for
prosperity, nor indeed for fairness.

The Nationalist Dimension
Nevertheless, most governments seem unimpressed by these arguments, partly
perhaps because Ministers and their advisers are not always well acquainted with
them. Another reason is that traditional mercantilism is often reinforced, not only by
considerations of fairness, but also by economic nationalism. This combination of
ideas is not new. Here is Raymond Cart’s account of the cconomic thinking of the
Spanish military dictator Primo de Rivera in the 1920s:
Haunted by dreams of autarky, he was pained by the French wines and
American cars of the upper classes and the preference Spanish doctors
showed for imported scalpels. Every article that could be produced or
grown in Spain must be produced, regardless of production costs:
hence ‘intervention’ to save domestic coal production, lead, and resin;
7

hence the attempt to create a national car industry, to finance homegrown cotton by a levy on imported cotton, to intensify home-grown
cereals policies. Thus the Spanish economy fell into the hands of
committees regulating everything from hydroelectric power to the
rabbit- skin industry.
Much the same could have been said about General Franco’s economic policies, until
the liberalisation of the Spanish economy began in the late 1950s. As to attitudes and
broad policies, as distinct from political regime there is not so much to choose
between Spain in the 1920s and India over the past four decades. Let me be quite
clear: I am not picking out exceptional cases. All over the world, trade intervention
has been used, and continues to be used as a means of promoting specific
developments, and asserting national identity, without much regard to market
opportunities or costs, Self- reliance, like self-sufficiency, is seen as a magic formula
for success.
Similar nationalist attitudes, slightly watered down, can be found today in Britain and
some other industrial countries. In particular official support for ‘high-tech’ projects
and programmes has been influenced by a state of mind that I can only call bipartisan
technological chauvinism. The development of home-grown technology, with public
funding and protection against ideas and equipment from abroad, is seen as conferring
on a country independence, prestige arid balance of payments gains. Mercantilism
joins with patriotic sentiment, and with soap operatic visions of authentically native
‘sunrise industries’, the programmes which are born of these ideas soon gain further
support and momentum, because of the powerful vested interests they create.
Nationalist arguments do not impress Mr MacQuedy. Protecting or subsidising
supposedly advanced indigenous developments makes no net contribution to
employment, and does nothing to reduce poverty or inequality. In these respects, it is
no different from less glamorous forms of trade interventionism, like keeping out
low—cost coal or sugar. As for arguments of strategy, self-reliance and prestige, these
are not only exaggerated by interested parties, they are also open to question. A
country does not gain in defensive capability, nor does it increase its freedom of
action, by saddling its business firms and armed services with uncompetitive highcost systems.
Autonomy and Trade Unilateralism
The orthodox economic view, then, is that discriminatory trade interventions are
generally contrary to the interests of the countries that make use of them. There are
exceptions to this, such as the case of moderate temporary protection for infant
industries, which are systematically spelled out in the professional literature; but I
doubt whether any of the measures that I described in the first part of this lecture can
count as such an exception. Countries like Britain would be better off if they adopted
liberal trade policies. Moreover, this holds true for any one country, or for a group of
countries like the European Community, regardless of whether the example is
followed by others.
This last conclusion is not a popular one. Most people will tell you that the right to
protect and subsidise, if necessary by means that are contrary to the spirit if not the
letter of international agreements, is one that every state must exercise in a world

8

where it is exercised by others. In Britain today, the government is widely criticised
for playing the game of international trade according to rules which other
governments feel free to break. DIYE holds that unilateral free trade is open to the
same objections as unilateral disarmament.
The orthodox viewpoint makes two concessions, of expediency only, to this point of
view. There may be a case now and then for using interventionist measures for purely
tactical reasons, as a bargaining counter. More important, it is politically easier for
governments to make what are widely seen as concessions on the trade front if other
countries are joining them as part of a wider international bargain. Reciprocal
concessions on tariffs and quotas have in fact made a large contribution to freeing
international trade since the Second World War. But though reciprocity may be
tactically convenient or even necessary as a basis for trade negotiations, it has no
deeper justification. The fundamental point is that traditional mercantilist ideas are
mistaken. Even from a strictly national viewpoint, therefore, the so-called concessions
that are made in giving up interventionist trade policies actually represent gains rather
than losses. Nor is the right to protect and subsidise at will a basic attribute of national
sovereignty. The freedom for governments to act against the national interest is hardly
a great prize, and their real autonomy is not reduced by giving up the right to bestow
ad hoc favours on every influential pressure group.
From the orthodox standpoint, then, current trends in Western trade policies are
disturbing. In particular, it is a sad reflection on present- day economic statesmanship
in countries such as Britain that it views the extensive and growing network of
discriminatory export restraint agreements as a positive achievement. In this respect
as in some others, official policies rest on a conception of national interests which is
pre-economic.

9

