REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 6: Markets, States and Economics
TRANSMISSION: 11 December 1985 – Radio 4
The Prime Minister [Mrs Thatcher]: The Government certainly believe
in market forces. I believe that the hon. Member’s question relates to
the price of North Sea oil. We have certainly been trying to keep down
the price increase in oil—rightly so—and for the month of January we
were not prepared to allow the price to go higher than $29.75…(House
of Commons proceedings. 7 February 1980).
In my previous lectures I have contrasted two ways of looking at economic systems
and choices. One is the orthodox economic view, which emphasises the role of prices
and markets. Not all economists accept it, and some of those who do are inclined to
stress its limitations, or even its dangers. Nonetheless it is distinctively,
characteristically professional. The other view of the world is that of do-it-yourself
economics. I have shown that the ideas of DIYE remain influential, as they always
have been; and I have questioned them both as a description of reality and as a guide
to economic policy. I have argued that generally speaking countries, both rich and
poor, would be better off in material terms if their governments relied more on prices
and markets, including international markets in particular, and less on administrative
regulations and controls; and I gave reasons for believing that this is a more important
aspect of economic policy than some of my professional colleagues are inclined to
think.
In this final lecture, I shall be setting these arguments in a wider context, and
considering political as well as economic aspects
The Conservative Government and the Market
Let me start by using a particular illustration to make two general points. At various
stages in these lectures I have referred to recent or current British economic policies,
drawing on a range of illustrations relating to energy industry and trade. In every case
I noted that these are established policies, pursued by successive governments
regardless of party, and that they can be seen to have been influenced by the ideas of
do-it-yourself economics. They have not changed since 1979. The notion that Mrs
Thatcher and those of her Ministers who share her views are ardent and consistent
devotees of 19th-century economic liberalism is mistaken. Over wide areas of policy,
they are convinced interventionists.
This of course is only part of the picture. It is clear that a number of Ministers,
including the Prime Minister herself, respond favourably to some of the ideas of
economic orthodoxy. Moreover, there are several respects in which British economic
policy since 1979 has become notably more market-oriented - in fact, the government
has gone further than I for one expected. In particular, there is the abolition of
exchange control; the reform of trade union and Labour laws; legislation against

1

professional monopolies; deregulation, as for example in the bus industry; and - ugly
but useful term - privatisation.
All this adds up to a considerable programme, which is still going ahead, in a House
of Commons debate in May 1985 a Minister actually went so far as to say that
protectionism creates problems rather than solving them, and to hint that the MultiFibre Arrangement might not be an appropriate device to keep in place for ever. This
indeed was a significant break with established D1YE doctrine, which was ill
received on both sides of the House of Commons.
At the same time, it has to be borne in mind that there are areas besides energy,
industry and trade in which there has been little change—for example, agriculture,
town planning and land use, and (apart from the sale of council houses) the highly
regulated and controlled housing market. Even privatisation does not necessarily
mean much. As critics have pointed out in relation to the sale of British Telecom, and
to the proposed sale of the British Gas Corporation, there is not much purpose in
privatising unless more competitive conditions are created, It is not clear that the
government has fully appreciated this point— and, of course, the easier it is for a
newly privatised corporation to make monopoly profits, the higher the selling price
which the government can hope to receive for it.
All in all, there has been substantial continuity, as well as some significant changes of
direction, in British economic policy under Mrs Thatcher. Even on the
macroeconomic side where the government has been most widely criticised, it is
worth recalling that both money supply targets and public expenditure cash limits
were brought in by the previous Labour government. As for resource allocation that
second tier of economic issues on which I have focused attention in these lectures, it
is the absence of change in policy, rather than the new departures, which is more
striking. In part this can be explained by tactical considerations relating to public
acceptability and to the balance of power within the Cabinet and the Conservative
Party. But the main single reason for continuity is that Ministers, so far from being
slaves to laissez-faire dogma, are influenced by the characteristic beliefs and
perceptions of do-it-yourself economics.
Mr MacQuedy’s Politics
The two general points which recent British developments illustrate are these. First,
DIYE is bipartisan. Its influence extends, as it generally has in past history, right
across the conventional political spectrum. Since I have stressed its universal appeal,
this is not a very startling conclusion. My second point is that those who are
influenced by orthodox economic ideas have no pre-assigned place on the spectrum left, right or centre. Contrary to what is often supposed, my fictional orthodox
colleague Mr MacOuedy, who favours market-oriented economic policies, is not a
man of the right. He holds no firm party political allegiance, and in most, if not all,
the OECD countries he would have to be classed as a floating voter.
At first sight this may seem strange. After all, for many decades it has been socialist
parties that have constituted the political left in Western countries; and socialists in
particular who have stressed the injustices and inefficiencies which may arise from
unregulated competitive markets, and who have argued the case for collective action
to prevent or remedy this. Again, greater reliance on prices and markets which Mr

2

MacQuedy broadly supports goes together with what has been termed ‘rolling back
the frontiers of the state’; and this is a cause which Mrs Thatcher and President
Reagan, among other political leaders who are classed as conservative or right of
centre, have declared as their own. These considerations suggest that orthodox
economic ideas go together with political conservatism.
This however is not the whole story. Mr MacQuedy is no Marxist and of course he
rejects any presumption that markets are antisocial. To that extent he is definitely not
a man of the left. But there are different kinds of socialist in the Western world today
and some of these share his concern with individual welfare and his perception of the
ways in which markets can help to promote it.
Moreover, generalised hostility to the market economy is by no means confined to the
left, as witness—among a long list of possible examples from history—the two
Spanish military dictatorships that I mentioned in my last lecture. Mr MacQuedy is
against collectivism whatever ideological colours it happens to wear; and, as we have
seen, he is likewise a sharp critic of economic nationalism, a creed which is embraced
at least as warmly on the right as on the left.
As to rolling back the frontiers of the state today, it is not only governments wearing a
conservative label that have shown themselves ready to follow this course. In my last
lecture I referred to the broad economic strategy which the OECD countries generally
have adopted and which includes maintaining firm control of the money supply,
limiting both public expenditure and fiscal deficits, and reducing the extent of official
regulations and controls.
This strategy has been adopted by left-of- centre governments in Australia. France.
Spain. Sweden and—most recently and dramatically— in New Zealand, where it was
in fact the election of a Labour government in 1984 which made possible a whole
series of moves towards a less controlled economy. In today’s world there is no
simple and predictable relationship between party labels and the direction of change
in economic policies.
Now the fact that different Western governments have recently been moving on
broadly similar lines does not of course mean that economic policy has ceased to be a
matter of controversy—far from it. But it would be wrong to think of the controversy
as being between right-wing parties which have embraced pro-market orthodox
economic ideas and left-wing parties which draw their economic inspiration from
other sources, whatever these may be. The controversies arc within parties as much as
between them.
I want now to explore these issues further and in doing so to bring another label more
into the picture. Although Mr MacQuedy is not a party man, something can
nonetheless be said about his political position—and mine too. The viewpoint that he
and I share is that of economic liberalism—where the term ‘liberal’ is spelt with a
small initial ‘l’, and used in its European rather than its American sense, so that it is
not identified with left-of-centre views.
We are spiritual descendants of the great liberal thinkers of the 18th and 19th
centuries, for whom economic and political freedom were interrelated goals. Our

3

votes are cast pragmatically and not necessarily on the basis of economic
considerations alone, for whatever individuals or parties seem likely to advance and
defend the liberal cause as we see it.
This cause is not a popular one, precisely because of its emphasis on the rote of prices
and markets. The numerous critics of the market economy are to be found on the left
and the right, and include economists as well as laymen. It is in the context of these
criticisms that I want to offer a final variation on my central theme, the contrast
between economic ideas of different kinds and origins.
Laissez—Faire, Markets and Governments
The objections to economic liberalism and the market economy centre on the role of
governments and states, both nationally and internationally. For many people
liberalism goes with laissez-faire, which in turn is viewed as outdated, negative,
unconcerned with what happens to weaker members of society and de facto favouring
the stronger and uncompromisingly negative in its attitude to the state.
This rests on a double misconception. First, it distorts the message of laissez-faire.
Second, it wrongly identifies belief in a market economy with an extreme
interpretation of the laissez- faire principle.
As to the first point, laissez-faire gets an undeservedly bad press. The message it
conveys is not that governments should be inert or indifferent. Its emphasis is a
positive one. It is concerned with economic freedom, including the freedom of
individuals and enterprises to enter industries or occupations, to choose their place of
residence or operation within a country and to decide their own products, processes
and markets. There is nothing outdated about these principles, nor do they operate
against the weak. On the contrary, they enable opportunities to be opened up more
widely, and thus operate against special privileges within an economic system. It is no
accident that outside the communist world the economy which most conspicuously
departs from laissez-faire is that of the Republic of South Africa.
In any case, liberalism is not to be identified with hostility to the state, nor with a
doctrinaire presumption that governments have only a minor role in economic life. On
the contrary, the liberal view of the role of the state, both internal and external, is
strongly positive.
Clearly, the efficient functioning of any economy presupposes the maintenance of
order, which in turn depends on effective government. Moreover, most liberals would
accept that the active involvement of governments is needed if the right balance
between intervention and laissez-faire is to be maintained. Governments have to
concern themselves with the distribution of income and wealth. They are also
responsible for the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies and, more generally for
trying to ensure conditions in which broad macroeconomic developments will be
satisfactory. There is no automatic guiding formula for any of these matters. They
require the continuous exercise of judgment, based on informed professional analysis.
As to the international aspects, acceptance of liberal ideas does not at all imply a
downgrading of the status or functions of the national state. It is true that those who
favour a market economy also favour, as part of their system of belief, a liberal

4

international economic order in which broadly speaking both trade and payments are
free from official regulations. But while any move in this direction naturally reduces
the sphere of government activity, even the freest of international regimes does not—
contrary to what is often alleged—involve an undermining of sovereignty, still less a
loss of national identity. Proof of this is to be found in the half-century or so
preceding the First World War. During this period international transactions of all
kinds were largely free from restrictions, but this did not at all mean that the rote of
national stales was eroded. Then as now, the international system was primarily a
system of states. The political significance of frontiers was not diminished by the fact
that generally speaking goods money and people could move across them unhindered.
In this connection, I myself believe that the national state has an indispensable role in
preserving and extending liberal institutions. Where freedom and democracy now
exist, they are the creations of particular national sovereign entities, with well-defined
geographical boundaries. Their survival depends on the continued existence of such
states, and the readiness of the governments and peoples concerned to resist, if
necessary, coercion and violence on the pan of other states.

Economic Order and Disorder
So far from liberals having a doctrinaire bias against the state, it is their more innocent
critics, under the sway of intuitive economic ideas, who are prone to accept
unquestioningly that centrally devised policies and strategies are both necessary and
effective. This goes with three interrelated states of mind. One is the unreflecting
centralism which I described in my third lecture. The second is a failure to visualise
the potential co-ordinating role of prices and markets: it is simply assumed that a
coherent set of outcomes can be achieved only through conscious central design. Last,
there is the naive but widely accepted belief that actions undertaken from motives of
self-interest in general and profitability in particular, cannot be expected to produce
beneficial results. From all this comes a view of markets as anarchic, amoral and
ineffective. This view does not involve a conscious rejection of the orthodox
economists’ vision of reality, but rather a lack of awareness that such a vision exists.
By contrast, from the liberal point of view it is the market economy, together with the
framework of laws and institutions that enables it to function effectively, which serves
to establish order, while ad hoc discretionary interferences by governments are a
source of disorder. In one sense economic liberalism can be said to go against the
laissez-faire principle since it argues that the freedom of governments to act should be
constrained by explicit rules and principles. The case for this is political as well as
economic.
Of the many examples which could serve to illustrate this point, let me refer again to
established bipartisan British official policies in relation to North Sea oil. In general,
licences to operate in the British sector of the North Sea are awarded on a
discretionary basis. Governments prefer this, largely because it gives them greater
control - not just over the award of the licences but of the whole sequence of
exploration. development, production and disposal of oil. In particular, they can
favour British oil companies and British offshore suppliers, promote specific oilrelated developments within Britain, and ensure if need arises that preference is given

5

to British refiners and consumers. To renounce the possibility of exercising such
control would be widely regarded as irresponsible.
The effect, however, is to establish a condition of chronic absence of order. This has
two aspects. First, the award of discretionary licences means that valuable property
rights are handed over without charge. In order to recover as much as possible of the
subsequent gains made by the recipients a special and necessarily complex tax regime
has been set up, which inevitably has become the subject of constant amendments and
revisions. The profits of the companies are only loosely related to their own
performance and to the price of oil, which are the incentives that ought to operate, and
instead largely depend on their success in the continuing sequence of tax negotiations.
Second, the companies are permanently open to pressures from the government, since
their chances of getting further licence awards without having to pay for them depend
on what is officially seen as good behaviour; and these pressures are often brought to
bear in ways that are not fully disclosed, since the government would find it
embarrassing to come clean. Even if the pressures were exercised to some genuine
national purpose, which I have argued they are not, this would still be an unhealthy
situation,
Here as in so many cases, economic policy is viewed, and indeed consciously
designed, as an unending series of complicated, opportunist, semi-political deals.
Within countries, the effects of this are not only to slow down economic progress but
also to corrupt political Life. On the wider international scene these same conceptions
of national interest and of how economic policy is to be viewed lead to continuing and
avoidable friction between governments. Liberal trade policies do not in the least
guarantee peace, any more than in themselves they ensure rapid economic progress.
But they help to restrict areas and grounds of international antagonism, and make for
a more ordered as well as a more prosperous world,
The Professional Critics
So far, in comparing the ideas of economic liberalism with those of its critics, I have
been concerned with the objections to the liberal approach which are characteristically
made by laymen rather than by economists’ themselves, But, of course, there is a
widely held professional point of view, to which I referred in my last lecture, that
governments have been moving too far towards allowing outcomes to be decided by
markets. This in turn is attributed to the influence of economists’ ideas, which (it is
argued) are based on a mistaken view of how economic systems actually work.
This line of argument is not necessarily incompatible with what I have been saying in
these lectures. As to differing views of the system, and of the leading issues of
policy— mainly macroeconomic ones—that are involved, I have not taken sides. In
any case, it may well be that; typically, governments rely too much on markets in
some areas of policy, and too little in others. However, I find it hard to take seriously
those who argue in broad and unqualified terms that governments around the world
are in danger of falling too much under the influence of liberal ideas. Although the
analogy is not exact, such people put me in mind of those who hold that wearing seatbelts in cars is wrong, because it is possible to imagine certain kinds of accidents
where this would increase the risk. The bias is the other way. In every country there is
a strong built-in tendency to restrict the sphere of markets, because it is the ideas of

6

DIYE that are dominant. This is the aspect of reality that I have chosen to emphasise,
because my own experience has impressed it on me, and because I believe that it has
not been sufficiently recognised.
The Limitations of Orthodoxy
I want to end this final lecture, as I ended my first one, with some personal reflections
on the limitations and uses of economics as a guide to the interpretation of events and
the choice and design of actual policies.
Let me begin by emphasising what I have not said, and do not believe. At no point in
these lectures have I argued or implied that the world’s economic problems—still less
its wider social problems—would be solved if universal free markets prevailed, or if
power were safely lodged in the hands either of economists certified as orthodox or of
political leaders who relied on such people. It is true that I have made a case for wider
recognition of the role of prices and markets, especially in the international sphere,
and that this case rests on economic ideas. But I have not presented either the ideas
themselves or the changes in direction that they would lead to as a panacea. It is in
fact a profound mistake to suppose that complex social and economic issues are like
the clues to crossword puzzles, so that specific and lasting solutions to them can be
identified.
Just as economics does not offer solutions, so economic analysis in itself cannot
provide a detailed blueprint for the actual conduct of affairs. As I stressed in my first
lecture, general economic reasoning is only one element in the understanding of a
real-life issue or problems and—let me now add—understanding, even where it can
actually be achieved, is no more than a prelude to action, The action itself often has to
be decided under the pressure of more or less unexpected events, A distinguished
British economist, Sir Alec Cairncross, has recently pointed to the distinction between
‘the theorists who seek to trap the inner secrets of the economy in their models and
the practitioners who live in a world of action where time is precious, understanding
is limited, nothing is certain, and non-economic considerations are always important
and often decisive’. In these lectures I have been largely concerned with general
ideas, though I have provided specific illustrations for them. I have said little about
the problems that arise in translating the ideas into practice, problems which would
remain even if economists were more agreed than they are.
Another consideration is that orthodox economic ideas extend to only a part of
individual and social life. The orthodox system focuses on individual agents who are
seeking economic advantage; it views their thoughts and actions, and their
relationships with others, in terms of transactions which are subject to more or less
systematic calculation with a view to maximising probable gains. It draws attention to
the ways in which markets can enable these transactions to be conducted more
effectively, so that economic goals are more fully realised, and it looks for ways in
which the sphere of markets can be extended. I believe, and have argued in these
lectures, that this emphasis is justified. At the same time, there is a risk of overdoing
it. At the individual level, the picture of human beings as rational maximisers is a
caricature, albeit perhaps a useful one. For this and other reasons, I think there is a
tendency for orthodox economists to overstate the extent to which societies both are
and can be governed by motives of self-interested calculation. In this I part company
with my friend Mr MacQuedy, who finds my attitude to these questions somewhat

7

lacking in professional rigour. Rightly or wrongly, I am less of an imperialist for my
subject than he is.
By way of final disclaimer, let me take up again the point that I made at the end of my
first lecture. Just as I make no extravagant claims for market-oriented policies and the
ideas which lend support to them, so the claims that I do make are not dependent on a
favourable view of the progress of economics as a discipline. I have called these
lectures Innocence and Design, where the innocence refers to intuitive economic
ideas, and the design to the elaborate system of thought and inquiry which orthodox
economics has built up over many decades.
But though I think the contrast is valid. I am not arguing that the orthodox design is
either grand or complete, nor even that it is evolving in an orderly and systematic
way. The very fact that economics is such a divided profession suggests that its status
and progress arc open to debate.
So I have no starry-eyed view either of what economics has achieved as an academic
discipline, or of what it can offer as a guide to immediate action in the uncertain and
rapidly changing situations of real life. Nor have I glossed over the differences of
opinion within the subject. It has to be acknowledged that economists are unable to
provide agreed answers to a wide range of questions on which people naturally look
to them for guidance and that in economics, even more perhaps than in other
disciplines, the advice that political and business leaders receive from the
professionals will depend on whom they ask.
Reasons for being a Constructivist
All this, however, does not alter the fact that in these lectures I have been concerned
to emphasise the uses rather than the limitations of my subject. One of the many
possible ways of classifying economists is to distinguish ‘constructivists’ from
sceptics. The ‘constructivists’ recognise that orthodox economic analysis is not allembracing, but they choose nonetheless to emphasise its usefulness in relation to
issues of policy, and to underline the dangers of ignoring or going against it. By
contrast, the sceptics acknowledge that the orthodox approach is both elegant and
helpful within its limits, but they prefer to stress the narrowness of these limits, and to
dwell on the inadequacy of the approach both as a guide to social reality and as a
basis for deciding policy. Rather to my surprise, my working experience, in a variety
of situations and countries, has led me to become an increasingly staunch
constructivist, though for the reasons I have just sketched out I am on the sceptical
wing of the party.
My allegiance has both a negative and a positive side. The negative aspect has
provided the main single theme of these lectures. I have argued that economic
analysis can make a major contribution, both to clearer understanding and to the
framing of actual policies, in so far as it displaces pre-economic ways of thinking. In
particular, the orthodox economic approach offers an alternative to the mutually
reinforcing centralist, nationalist and mercantilist assumptions of do-it-yourself
economics. I have dwelt on this, since it is in the international sphere pre-eminently
that current official policies, in rich and poor countries alike, are influenced by
conceptions of how economic systems work, and where national interests lie, which
do not bear informed scrutiny.

8

As to the positive side, there are two points that I would stress. The first applies to
economists in general, rather than constructivists in particular. Two advantages of an
economic training are the readiness and ability to think in terms of interdependence
and system effects, and a concern with quantitative evidence and ways of interpreting
it. In both these respects, as I have indicated at various points in these lectures. DIYE
is typically and often unknowingly deficient.
I would make a further claim, broader and more personal, for what I have termed the
orthodox economic approach in particular. Economics is not the whole of life, nor is
economic policy a purely technical exercise. With economics, as indeed with any
subject or system of thought which is concerned with human affairs, it has to be asked
not only how far it illuminates its own particular area, but also whether it contributes
to a wider understanding. I believe that the orthodox approach throws light on
questions that go beyond economics, and that it provides a vantage-point for assessing
both economic and non-economic aspects of events and choices. Of course, the
intellectual traffic is not in one direction only: economics, particularly in its
application to policy, will always have much to learn from other disciplines. But the
orthodox framework of thought has, I think, a central strategic position in the realm of
ideas. I would claim for it that it enables many of the issues of social and economic
life to be seen in clearer perspective, and with a juster sense of proportion. In the
complex, uncertain and dangerous world that we inhabit, this claim is not to be
despised.

9

