REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 5: DIYE plus the Lobbies: Counting the Cost
TRANSMISSION: 8 December 1985 – Radio 4

It has not been recorded that the dramatic appeal made by 1,000
leading economists to Mr Hoover in 1930. asking him to veto the
Smoot-Hawley Bill, caused that gentleman to hesitate before
approving the bill. (E.E. Schattschneider, Policies, Pressures and the
Tariff; Prentice-Hall, 1935; p. vii.)
In this lecture I want to consider two questions. First, why is it that in some areas of
economics, but not in others, ideas that are characteristically professional have so
little influence? Second, a much larger issue: how much does this lack of influence
matter?
The Two Worlds of Economics Revisited
I think the first of these questions is easy to answer in broad terms. I spoke in my first
lecture about two tiers of economic problems and issues. One is that of
macroeconomics. The second has provided the subject-matter of my last three
lectures. It is chiefly in this second tier that do-it-yourself economics holds sway.
Why is macroeconomics different? The main reasons, I think, are two. First, many of
the issues are so inescapably technical that the need for specialised expertise is
accepted; and though economics is never the only form of expertise required, it is the
most universally relevant one. Second, macroeconomic issues are characteristically
national or economy-wide rather than sectional. This means that interest groups are
either not much involved or less influential when they are involved. Both points are
true, for instance, in the question of whether Britain should become a fullparticipating member of the European Monetary System (the EMS). Of course, not all
‘first-tier’, macroeconomic issues are so esoteric as this one, or of such limited
concern to lobbyists; and even EMS membership has to be considered from a political
as well as a technical standpoint. All the same, in relation to macroeconomic policy
Keynes was right: here economists’ ideas do count for more than vested interests. But
in my second tier, as I have shown, what governments chiefly respond to are the
mutually reinforcing influences of the lobbies and the economics of Everyman.
Economists’ ideas, when they are noticed at all, are often set aside.
Why Economists Fail to Influence People
Why is it that long-established economic orthodoxy has made so little impact on the
ways of thinking of informed, intelligent and disinterested laymen? Certainly the main
reason is that the ideas of DIYE have such a strong intuitive appeal. But part of the
explanation lies with us, the professionals. To an extent which is striking, even
disturbing, we have failed to impress others with our point of view.

1

One reason for this is that not all economists share that point of view. Some are highly
critical of the orthodox principles of individualism, reliance on markets and prices,
decentralisation, and non-discrimination, including free trade. I’ll have something to
say about these dissenters in my final lecture. But those professionals who would
actually side with do-it- yourself economics against orthodoxy are a minority. Most of
us, on both the left and the right of the conventional political spectrum, are
conditioned by our training to view what I have called second-tier questions through
orthodox spectacles. In fact, I would say that economists are at present more agreed—
perhaps I should say less disunited—on these questions where they are typically not
listened to, than on the macroeconomic issues where they often are. But this
consensus in favour of orthodox as opposed to intuitive ways of thinking has not led
to a general acceptance of them outside the profession.
In part, this may be due to the conspicuous disagreements in macroeconomics and
elsewhere, which make for public scepticism about what any of us may have to say on
any subject. But there are other reasons too. One concerns those economists of
orthodox leanings who think that second-tier issues matter. Here 1 feel there is a
major problem of communication. With honourable exceptions starting with David
Hume and Adam Smith and continuing to Sam Brittan and Milton Friedman in our
own day, we have failed to argue our case persuasively, in language that can be
understood by educated non-specialists. The growing professionalisation of
economics, while natural and in general to be welcomed, has worsened this problem
in recent decades. Economists have become increasingly preoccupied with each
other’s thoughts and writings, and less interested in what anyone else might think.
This happens with every profession, but it is more unfortunate for us than for others.
A further reason is that much of the professional support for the orthodox point of
view is sporadic, lukewarm or reluctant, because interest and attention are directed
elsewhere. For the past half-century, and despite a reaction during the last 15 years or
so, economics has been dominated by a view of the subject and of the world as a
whole which I would call ‘macro-supremacist’. On this view the important problems,
both intellectual and practical, lie in the domain of macroeconomics, while other
issues by comparison are of small account. This concentration on macroeconomics
has had two natural results. The extent to which other economic policies are
dominated by intuition, rather than more distinctively professional ideas, has often
gone unobserved; and even when observed, it has not necessarily been seen as a
matter for much concern.
The Rise of Macro—Supremacist Views
This brings me to the second and larger of my two questions: how much does it matter
if do-it-yourself economics prevails, at any rate within my second tier? In
approaching this question, I would like for a moment to put on one side the main
theme of these lectures. I want to turn from the foreground of my picture to the
background, to set my argument in a wider context of economic ideas and events.
Let me start with a well-worn but helpful metaphor. Economic policy within each
country is concerned with the size of the cake and the way in which it is divided up—
in other words, with production and distribution or, in current textbook language,
efficiency and equity. Economic efficiency in this sense is conventionally thought of
as having three aspects. One of these is the concern of macroeconomics as I have

2

defined it. From this point of view, efficiency means making full use of the resources
that are available to an economy at a given time—in particular, resources of labour—
so that the ‘productive potential’ of the economy is realised. In a developed country
such as Britain, the best single indicator of success in this respect is the
unemployment rate—or more strictly, the difference between the current and
prospective unemployment rate and whatever is thought to be the minimum
sustainable rate.
But, as the years pass, the productive resources available within an economy will
normally increase: the labour force grows; the capital stock is built up; knowledge and
skills accumulate; and technical progress occurs, so that labour and other inputs can
be used more productively. This is the second aspect of efficiency - the growth of
productive potential over time, and in particular, the growth of productivity. The third
aspect is what economists call ‘resource allocation’ - in other words, making the best
use of the resources available to an economy within any given period. This is, in fact,
my second tier of economic issues. The issues largely concern what goods and
services are produced, and how they are produced; and underlying the economists’
approach to this is a perception of the way in which free markets, with prices
responding to changes in demand and supply, can help to achieve a more efficient
outcome.
Now when the Great Depression of the 1930s swept over the world, it swept over the
orthodox economic establishment as well. The professionals had not foreseen this
calamity; they were unable to explain it convincingly; and they had no agreed remedy
to offer which carried conviction. The long-established professional view of the
economy as a self-equilibrating system, in which involuntary unemployment was not
a serious problem, was undermined by events. Since it was through changes in
relative prices that the self-equilibrating forces were supposed to act, people’s faith in
the efficacy of prices and markets was also undermined.
In this situation, the Keynesian system offered both a diagnosis and a prescription. At
the analytical level, it gave reasons for believing that modem capitalist economies had
a chronic tendency towards deficiency of demand, which explained why
unemployment had become a persistent and serious problem. The remedy lay in
government action, largely through fiscal and monetary policies, to maintain demand
at an adequate level. Hence, the central task of economic policy was now defined as
being the management of demand.
From this Keynesian standpoint, it was full employment, or the first aspect of
economic efficiency, that counted. By comparison the third aspect, the allocation of
resources, was unimportant. Prices and markets could broadly be relied on to deal
with it, but only because the issues involved were minor. I should add that Keynes
himself, and many of his professional associates and followers too, were neither
socialists nor believers in detailed central planning. The fact remains that one of the
results of the Keynesian revolution, and a long- lasting one, was to play down the
significance of resource allocation issues, and to stress the limitations rather than the
uses of markets.
As to the second aspect of economic efficiency, the growth of productive potential
over time, the view became widely accepted in the 1950s and 1960s that full

3

employment was in itself a strongly positive factor, through its effects on investment
and attitudes to change. If you took care of full employment, you would help
substantially with growth—and indeed with resource allocation (point number three)
as well, since full employment would also over time weaken sectional and
mercantilist pressures. So successful demand management was seen as the key to
improving economic efficiency in all its aspects. Questions of income distribution
apart, economic policy was macroeconomics with trimmings.
Macroeconomic Policies: The Continuing Debate
In most of the OECI) countries, this view of the world continued to gain ground up to
the end of the 1960s. The post-Keynesian consensus became widely established as the
prevailing view. Then, like the older accepted doctrines in the Great Depression of the
1930s, it was shaken by a combination of unforeseen events and professional
criticism. A new series of major debates was initiated within the profession, more
prolonged and less one-sided than those of the 1930s, though once again they were
mainly centred on macroeconomic issues.
What undermined the new orthodoxy can largely be summed up by an ugly but
convenient word, ‘stagflation’—high rates of unemployment and inflation persisting
together. Accepted demand management policies could not prevent its onset in the
mid-1970s, nor did they offer an effective formula for coping with it once it had
become established. The post- Keynesian consensus was challenged by the rival
monetarist approach, which had foreseen the likelihood of accelerating inflation, even
in the presence of higher unemployment rates, and explained it. As events unfolded in
the 1970s, the debate was extended from the groves of Academe to the corridors of
power.
The issue is often described as one of Keynesianism versus monetarism. but it goes
wider than that. It also goes deeper than the practical question of the importance of
monetary policy as such. It concerns the properties and behaviour of economic
systems. Although the labels are not ideal, the two rival schools of thought can be
described as post-Keynesian and ‘new classical’. Like Keynes himself, the postKeynesians view modern market economies as subject to disturbances which
automatic mechanisms will not smooth out, so there is no presumption that output will
stay close to the level corresponding to the lowest sustainable rate of unemployment.
The post-Keynesians also believe—though often with more reservations and
qualifying clauses than 15 years ago— that financial policies, possibly supported by
incomes policies, can do much to correct this deficiency. Theft view of the world can
be summed up as stability pessimism combined with policy optimism. The new
classical position is the reverse of this. Its adherents share with Keynes’s opponents of
the I930s the belief that there are strong self-equilibrating forces at work in market
economies. They are stability optimists. At the same time, they stress the
limitations—some would say, the impotence— of official stabilisation policies.
One result of the debate, and of the chastening experiences of Western economies in
recent years, has been to weaken the hold of macro-supremacist ideas. This can be
seen both in professional writings and in the actions of governments. Many of the
post-Keynesians now accept that demand management policies will work better if the
functioning of markets, and particularly of labour markets, is improved. This
establishes a link with their opponents, who are strongly market-oriented. In spite of

4

the wide differences, there is a shared interest in the interactions between the
behaviour of individual markets and that of the system as a whole; and there is often
agreement on specific measures to improve resource allocation—or as they are often
now termed, ‘supply side’ measures. There is also an uneasy consensus which
embraces most post-Keynesians and monetarists—to which, however, other ‘new
classical’ economists are not parties—that economic policy should be viewed in terms
of both demand side and supply side measures, which are to be seen as
complementary and mutually supporting.
The Current Economic Strategy
This middle-of-the-road consensus is reflected in the broad economic strategy that has
now been adopted in virtually all the OECD countries. There is a common concern
with inflation, and a common emphasis on maintaining firm control over the money
supply, limiting both public expenditure and fiscal deficits, and reducing the scope of
government regulations and controls. As compared with ten to 15 years ago, demand
management is no longer the jewel in the crown of economic policy, and official
thinking has moved in a market- oriented direction.
So far, however—and here I return to my main theme—this change of direction has
not greatly affected my second tier of economic issues. The main impetus for change
has come from the pressure of events and the ferment of ideas in the world of
macroeconomics. While it is true that reigning economic doctrines are no longer
macro-supremacist, the debate on ideas and policy, as well as the day-to-day thinking
of governments, is still macro-centric, and understandably so. Second-tier issues,
though now seen as more pertinent, remain subsidiary.
How much does this matter? Well, despite the shift in opinion that I have just
sketched out, 1 believe that many of my economist colleagues would respond to this
question with a dismissive shrug of the shoulders. A common professional criticism
of these lectures will be that Henderson spent his time discussing small questions on
which 90 per cent of literate economists have been agreed for 200 years, instead of
addressing the issues that really matter. Let me tell you why my own perspective is
different.
A moment ago, I referred to three aspects of efficiency in the economic sense: full
employment, economic growth, and improved resource allocation. I showed how it
was natural from the standpoint of Keynesian ideas to think of full employment as not
only the most important but also the key to the other two. Let me now offer you some
reasons for believing that on the contrary it is the third area of policy, the allocation of
resources that holds the key.
Misdirected Investment
Some years ago I broadcast a series of talks which I called, with due
acknowledgement to Oscar Wilde, ‘The Unimportance of Being Right’. In them I
described the Concorde and the Second UK Nuclear Power Programme as two of the
three worst civil investment decisions in the history of mankind, the third being the
Soviet counterpart to Concorde. Since then I have come to think that some major
ventures elsewhere, including the government nuclear power programme in India,
may have given rise to comparable losses.

5

I mention these expenditure programmes because they have been conspicuously
costly, but also in order to emphasise two points. First, they involve the allocation of
resources. It is necessary to make this statement of the obvious, since a surprising
number of economists have the mistaken idea that resource allocation is only a matter
of what happens to relative prices in an otherwise unchanging world. On the contrary,
it extends to the choice of investments. Second, it is no accident that my examples are
in the public sector. Of course, private firms can make expensive mistakes; but the
fact that they are dependent on markets sets a limit to the amounts they can lose. In
the public sector the limits are less well drawn, and often ineffective. Major
programmes which yield few outputs, or even none at all, can acquire a status and
momentum which are almost unassailable. The fast reactor programme in Britain is an
example. If it had never been embarked on, more than 30 years ago now little would
have been lost; if it were abandoned now, I believe that the same would hold true. The
whole nuclear power programme in India rests on an intuitive technocratic vision of
the early I950s, well laced with a brand of do-it-yourself economics which eminent
scientists find congenial. The results in terms of costs incurred and actual kilowatthours generated have been consistently disappointing; but so powerful is the vision
that it is proof against all evidence and experience.
Industrial Strategies
The same imperviousness to evidence can be seen in the industrial policies pursued
over the past four decades by successive British governments. I believe the long and
continuing sequence of assisted programmes. subsidised ventures, officially arranged
mergers, support for lame ducks, and selective aid for special cases has had, and will
continue to have, adverse effects on British economic performance. Obvious fiascos,
of which the De Lorean, Lear Fan and Nexos projects are recent examples, are only a
part of the story. In so far as these were due to straight commercial misjudgement, I
find them less depressing than schemes which owed their support to the combination
of DIVE, nationalist sentiment, and the natural desire of Ministers and officials to
play, and be seen to be playing, an active role. It is this combination which ensures
that past failures, where they are noticed at all, do not undermine the widespread and
continuing support in Britain for an activist industrial strategy.
Let me add that Britain is no exception in this respect. It would be easy to compile a
list of cautionary examples from the industrial policies of other countries—large and
small, rich and poor. Nor is it only national governments that are involved. I believe
some of the much- applauded programmes of the European Commission in the field
of advanced technology will worsen the problem they are designed to cure. All over
the world, ambitious notions of industrial strategy provide the impetus for misdirected
investments.
Investment and Growth
So far I have spoken of particular investment or expenditure programmes. But
resource allocation goes wider than this. It extends for example to the division of
investment between the public and the private sectors. Again, at the level of the
economy as a whole, the question arises as to how the total resources available will be
divided between, on the one hand, investing for the future—through expenditure on
equipment and buildings, research and development, education and training—and on
the other hand, current consumption. This key ratio of total investment to national

6

product is itself one of the topics that comes under the heading of the allocation of
resources.
From this a striking conclusion can be drawn. You will remember that the second
aspect of economic efficiency is growth—the growth of productive potential over
time. But this will be strongly influenced by the total rate of investment and by the
return on the particular projects which make up that total: growth, in other words,
depends on the quantity and quality of future-directed expenditure. To the extent that
this is so, the second aspect of economic efficiency has no independent status—it
merges into the third. Economic growth itself becomes a matter of resource allocation.
Growth Performance and Trade Regimes
Viewed in this way, the issue of growth is linked to the role of markets. The possibly
close connection between a country’s growth performance and the extent of its
reliance on markets was brought home to me in the late 1960s by a combination of
personal experience and some notable work by other economists. At issue were the
developing countries and their choice of trade policies. Up to then it had been
generally assumed, by economists and practical men alike, that in these countries
there was little scope for relying on prices and markets, certainly less than in the
industrial countries where post-Keynesian orthodoxy in any case played down their
role. As part of this view, it was thought that the developing countries would be wise
to reduce their dependence on trade and world markets, and to operate regulated trade
and payments systems. Events and professional argument have now discredited this
notion. It is widely agreed that those developing countries that established open trade
regimes, which were relatively free from administrative controls and did not
discriminate against exports, were able thereby to achieve higher sustained rates of
growth in output and standards of living. The Outstanding successes in this respect
have been Bong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan. Their achievements have
matched those of Japan.
At the other end of the spectrum is Ghana. It presents the rare case of a country which
has actually become poorer compared with a quarter of a century ago, when it was the
most prosperous state in black Africa. The main single element in Ghanaian
prosperity was the flourishing cocoa industry which had been built up by peasant
proprietors. A recent study describes it as having been ‘garrotted’ by government
policies. Chiefly, these policies comprised low, controlled prices to producers, taxes
on cocoa exports, and a persistently and grossly overvalued exchange rate. For those
who believe that what happens to relative prices within an economy is a matter of
minor importance, the case of Ghanaian cocoa, and indeed the whole depressing
sequence of events there, is worth pondering.
Let me underline that all the cases I have cited, in developed and developing countries
alike, involve different facets of resource allocation which are inseparable in the real
world: prices, markets, investment and international trade. I began by discussing a
range of misconceived investment projects. But in all of these governments had
deliberately set aside market criteria, and in effect imposed their own prices—either
explicitly through subsidies, or implicitly through hidden preferences and
administrative regulations. In so doing, they turned their backs on the opportunities
offered, both for buying and for selling, by international markets-just as governments
have also done in creating administered trade regimes, as in the Multi-Fibre

7

Arrangement or the Common Agricultural Policy. In some cases, they also turned
their backs on ideas because they were foreign. At the level of particular sectors and
investment projects, this has brought low returns or actual losses. Pursued on an
economy- wide scale, as in many developing countries, it has been the chief retarding
influence on economic growth.
The Distortion of Incentives
A related and fundamental point is this. Whenever governments use discretionary
instruments of economic policy there are Liable to be damaging effects on growth,
because of the way in which these distort incentives. Put simply, growth arises from
innovation and change within society: and individuals and enterprises make
innovations, and initiate or accept changes, because it is in their interests to do so.
They are motivated by both the expectation of gain and the fear of loss. But typically,
when governments make ad-hoc use of licences, prohibitions, import levies or quotas,
subsidies, procurement preferences or even informal arm-twisting, the effect is to
reward one particular group within a country at the expense of everyone else. This, of
course, is why the interest groups are so active and well organised. The more these
administrative devices are used, the more the fortunes of firms and industries, of
employees and owners, depend for their success, not in providing what people are
willing to pay for, but in persuading those in authority to adopt measures which are
contrary to the interests of the rest of the community and which retard the process of
change.
In so far as political processes take over the functions of competitive markets, it is no
longer enterprise or efficiency that bring rewards, but successful lobbying, backed by
expertise in the ways and personalities of government and in the arcane complexities
of official regulations. Historically it is the great achievement of the market economy
to have made sustained economic growth possible. by establishing a sphere of activity
in which the self-interest of individuals, together with their skills and creative
energies, are harnessed to socially beneficial ends. Most modem governments think
little of casting this advantage aside.
Lastly, let me recall a point I made earlier in this lecture. Many post-Keynesian
economists would broadly agree with their new classical opponents that if markets are
able to operate more freely this is likely to assist in bringing down the current high
unemployment rates in many OECD countries. It may also help in the longer term to
reduce the minimum sustainable rate of unemployment in some of these economies. If
this is true, then lull employment, as well as growth, falls partly at least under the
heading of resource allocation.
In the last half of this lecture I have been making a case. I have argued that the
prosperity of countries depends in large part on how far their governments are
prepared to allow choices, and especially investment choices, to be influenced by
market forces in general and international market opportunities in particular. Let me
emphasise that in putting this case I am not trying to remove macroeconomic issues
from the stage: far from it. And though I have given reasons for questioning the
macro-supremacist view which prevailed for so long after the Keynesian revolution, I
can well see the attractions of that view. I have reached a different position myself
through a combination of personal experience, events on the world scene, and
professional arguments; but I do not rule out the possibility that some time in the

8

future these combined influences, in a new and changing situation, might cause me to
move in the reverse direction. Meanwhile, however, I find it hard to sympathise with
those economists who think that resource allocation is synonymous with
macroeconomics, which as its name betrays is concerned only with small matters, and
that the term ‘marginal’ in economics is synonymous with unimportant. Nor do I
share the perception, widely held by professionals and laymen, that trade policies are
a specialised fringe issue in Western countries today. Together with public finance,
they form the central core of resource allocation questions; and for reasons I have just
outlined, I believe that the way in which governments handle these questions is
probably the main single influence on the wealth of nations.

9

