REITH LECTURES 1985: Innocence and Design
David Henderson
Lecture 2: Soap Opera in High Places
TRANSMISSION: 13 November 1985 – Radio 4

I have described how my own experience. while I was working many years ago as a
British civil servant, led me to make a distinction between economic ideas in general
and the ideas of economists in particular. Economists’ ideas are only a part of
economic ideas in general, which include beliefs and perceptions that are unrelated to
the characteristic ways of thought of trained economists. These are not supported by
any reference to published work, or to the results—such as these may be—of
professional economic inquiry. They have a life of their own. Because of this
autonomy, and the informality and lack of system which go with it, I have termed this
collection of beliefs and perceptions ‘do-it- yourself economics’ (DIYE).
In this week’s lecture, and in the two which will follow it, I shall sketch out the
leading elements of DIYE. I shall show how they differ from ideas that are widely
accepted by trained economists, and consider the implications of these differences for
economic policy. I am not trying to suggest that the economists’ ideas as I present
them, which can broadly be described as orthodox, are shared by everyone in our
profession. For the time being, professional opinion is represented only by my
fictional colleague Mr MacQuedy, who is a strict champion of orthodoxy and with
whom, on these issues at any rate, I am happy to associate myself.
As I outline these two approaches the amateur and the professional, I will be drawing
on real-life examples, culled from my well-stocked personal collection. They will
serve to emphasise the point that DIYE has been, and continues to be influential with
people who are themselves influential.
Soap Operatics in Three Guises
Well, what are the characteristic ideas and beliefs of do-it-yourself economics? I treat
them here under several rather disrespectful headings of my own choice, the first of
which is ‘soap opera’. I mean by this the disposition to ascribe to particular elements
within an economic system—industries sectors, products, processes or activities—
intrinsic qualities which (it is thought) should influence the way in which
governments treat them. I use the term because I believe this approach to economic
issues resembles soap opera in its crude assumptions and in its failure to reflect the
depth and complexity of real life. I think there are three main forms of soap operatics.
Let me give you a few instances of each, together with some of the official policies
that are based on them.
The grandest soap opera of all is concocted from ideas of manifest economic destiny,
in which features or component parts of an economic system are cast in historic roles.
In an article on issues confronting the European Community which he contributed to
The Times two years ago, the then Prime Minister of France, Pierre Mauroy, laid

1

down the following as the first of ‘some fundamental points’ on which there could be
no compromise:
European agriculture must in future be able to realise its full potential
and confirm its vocation as an exporter in order to play its part in the
balance of our current account, and to fulfil its duty to the Third
World.
In this case, as often happens the operatics were closely linked with another leading
element of DIYE, traditional mercantilism—the notion that if you increase exports or
reduce imports you must necessarily be doing your country some good. Mr Mauroy
did not explain precisely how European agriculture’s Lduty to the Third World has
been fulfilled by the restrictions imposed under the Common Agricultural Policy on
low-cost farm produce from developing countries, or for that matter by driving down
the world price of sugar on which some of these countries are heavily dependent,
through sales of high-cost Community surpluses.
More commonly it is manufacturing, rather than agriculture, which is assigned a
leading role. Such a casting exercise, though of a modest kind, was performed in an
interview given last year by Alfred Eckes, the Chairman of the US International Trade
Commission, which advises the President on applications from American industries
for protection against imports. Mr Eckes spoke of the need for older industries to
modernise, and added:
I really don’t believe myself that this nation is going to become a
nation of hamburger stands, Chinese restaurants, laundries, banks and
computer operators. I think we have to have some sort of
manufacturing sector.
For Mr Eckes, it is the manifest destiny of Americans to manufacture. However, soap
operatics rarely ride alone, and Mr Eckes’s apparent distaste for the service sector has,
I suspect, much to do with ‘structure snobbery’.
Structure snobbery, which is my second form of soap operatics, entails the remarkably
widespread belief that winners and also-rans can be identified within a country’s
economy—in other words, that there are activities which are to be desired and
favoured for what they are, and others which, if not positively undesirable, can be
seen to be lacking in dynamism or otherwise less worthy of esteem. As to which
activities fall into what category, it is simply taken for granted that well-informed
observers— politicians, civil servants, businessmen, scientists—can easily judge this.
A widespread variant of structure snobbery is the idea that it is both demeaning and
bad policy for a country to export raw materials and import manufactures. Why
demeaning? Be-cause this was supposedly the role that the former imperial powers
imposed on their colonies. Why is it thought to be bad policy? Partly because
manufacturing is perceived as a more rewarding form of economic activity than
agriculture or mining, but mainly—and here again there is a close link with traditional
mercantilism—because it is thought to be advantageous for a country to export
products in more finished rather than less finished form, since this is bound to
improve its balance of payments and create employment.

2

Given this perception, one possible line of policy for governments is to forbid or
discourage exports of raw materials. History gives many examples of this practice.
Here is one from the early part of the reign of Frederick the Great, following his
acquisition of Silesia in the 1740s:
Formerly, fine linen yarn from Silesia had been sent to Holland to be
bleached. Now the export of yarn was prohibited. The only exception
to this rule was that yarn might be sent to Bohemia to be woven
provided that it was eventually sent back to Silesia to be bleached.
A present-day counterpart to 18th-century linen yarn is timber. For instance, the
government of Indonesia has forbidden the export of logs. The idea is to ensure that
timber is exported only in sawn form. Similarly, in the United States, exports of logs
are largely banned from the federal lands west of the 100th meridian, while a number
of individual states have laws which ban the export of logs from timber grown on
state lands. Again—although as we will see other motives are present in this case—
the United States restricts the export of crude petroleum: in particular, there is a ban
on exports of Alaskan oil, for which ready markets exist in Japan. in a recent defence
of the Alaskan restriction, a senior Democratic member of the House of
Representatives, Congressman John Dingell, said that he was ‘totally opposed to
export of oil to Japan’, for what he called a ‘very simple’ reason:
We now occupy the position of a colony with Japan: we send them
raw materials and they send us finished products…That’s a very clever
way of increasing Japanese prosperity at the expense of the United
States.
Here Congressman Dingell was unconsciously echoing a line of argument which had
been used some months earlier in a speech by the Prime Minister of Malaysia. Dr
Mahathir, who asserted that trade-flows between Malaysia and Japan conformed to
‘the classic pattern of economic colonialism’. Soap opera knows no frontiers, while
the view of trade relationships taken by these eminent political figures was a familiar
one in the 17th century.
Essentialist Soap Operatics
In the cases I have just quoted, exports of raw materials are discouraged in order to
make way for something deemed to be better. But other situations can be found where
such exports are subject to control and even prohibition not on the grounds that they
are inferior or unrewarding products, but because, on the contrary, they are too
precious to be made freely available to foreigners. In these situations, both structure
snobbery and the traditional mercantilist concern for improving the balance of trade
are set aside. A third form of soap operatics what I call ‘essentialism’, has come into
operation. According to this simple-minded doctrine the outputs and activities of an
economic system can usefully be divided into two broad categories, essential and nonessential, the distinction between which must be clear to any experienced person.
Essentialists are strongly attracted to energy products. In Australia, for example,
‘petroleum exports are limited to ensure that the requirements of the domestic market
are satisfied’. American restrictions on the export of crude petroleum, some of which

3

go back to the 1920s have a similar justification. In Canada, ‘All exports of energy
(except coal) must be approved by the federal government’; and in the case of natural
gas, the federal National Energy Board “will license gas exports only if there is a
demonstrated surplus [over] ‘reasonably foreseeable Canadian requirements’. South
Africa has a similar system for licensing coal exports. The object in these cases is to
conserve non-renewable resources for essential domestic uses into the indefinite
future.
What about North Sea oil and gas, and the official British attitude to these issues?
Policy under successive governments, here as in other areas, betrays clearly the
influence of DIYE; but the influence is stronger in gas than in oil, it is true that in
both cases the government has extensive powers of control over the disposal of
production. Both oil and gas have to be landed in the United Kingdom, though this
requirement can be waived in special circumstances; and exports of crude oil are
subject to licence, which would no doubt be true of gas also if the question of
exporting should ever become a serious one. To this extent both are treated in the
same way; and this treatment distinguishes them from most other forms of output after all, an export licence is not regarded as necessary for buses or turbine generators
or cashmere sweaters.
Nevertheless, oil and gas have been treated differently. Governments of both parties
have flirted now and then with the idea of imposing restrictions, formal or informal,
on exports of crude oil; but for the past five years at least, and very largely before
that, producers have been free to choose their own markets and destinations. In gas,
by contrast, essentialism has reigned supreme, regardless of which party has been in
power. One aspect of this is that exports of gas, though not actually impermissible,
have been deliberately ruled out as a possibility. When the present Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Nigel Lawson became Secretary of State for Energy in 1981, it crossed
my mind that as a supposedly market-oriented Minister he might change this state of
affairs; but on balance I thought it unlikely. It was therefore with surprise that I read
in The Times on 11 February 1982 ‘LAWSON READY TO CONSIDER EXPORTS
OF NORTH SEA GAS’. But a few lines further on, I saw that essentialism was still
firmly in place: ‘Sales abroad would be considered…only if sufficient new
discoveries were made’. This remains the official British government position, and it
is strongly supported by the British Gas Corporation.
Micawber’s Discontinuity and Unreflecting Centralism
Essentialism, by the way, illustrates a chronic bias in the DIYE perception of choices
and alternatives. The bias is towards the dramatic, and a leading exemplar of it is
Charles Dickens’s Mr Micawber.
Annual income twenty pounds, annual expenditure nineteen pounds
nineteen and six, result happiness. Annual income twenty pounds.
annual expenditure twenty pounds ought and six, result misery.
The argument here would not impress my colleague Mr MacQuedy, who would point
out with justice that the difference between these two alleged extremes was only two
and a half per cent each way. DIYE is apt to see the world in terms of sharp contrasts,
switches and discontinuities, while the orthodox economists’ picture of reality
emphasises—some would say overemphasises—continuity and incremental changes.

4

Essentialists are like Mr Micawber, in that they believe there is only a narrow margin
between a situation in which supplies of essentials fall short of needs and one in
which they exceed them. Scarcity equals misery, therefore no sales abroad; happiness
is a surplus, which can legitimately be sold to foreigners.
Export restrictions are by no means the only administrative device of the essentialist.
Just as regulations can favour domestic consumers as against foreigners, so they can
be used to discriminate among domestic consumers themselves. Look at the strategic
thinking of the British Gas Corporation, which draws a clear line between ‘premium’
and ‘non-premium’ uses of gas. To quote some official words on the subject, which
remain as pertinent now as when they were written under a Labour government in
1978:
The policy of British Gas, agreed with the government, is to sell gas in
the markets where its particular qualities give it a premium
value…However, British Gas sells a limited amount of as on nonpremium markets on an interruptible basis.
An Orthodox Criterion: Willingness to Pay at the Margin
Let me use this particular aspect of British energy policy as the point at which I begin
to unveil the orthodox alternative. When uses of gas are designated as premium or
non- premium, we can reasonably ask: what is the basis of this distinction, and who is
to judge which is which? I have actually heard it suggested at a high level that the
difference between the two categories is not economic but thermal or physical, so that
for instance it is simply in the nature of things that gas, as a premium fuel, should not
he put to such an unworthy low-grade use as raising steam to generate electricity in
power stations. But in Ireland and Bangladesh, for example, where alternative fuels
are relatively much more costly than in Britain, gas is used as a fuel for power
stations. Why should this be ruled out? Surely the test must be an economic one,
which makes allowance for different circumstances, rather than one of technoaesthetic intuition? And once we admit that the question of the best pattern of use is
an economic one, it is unnecessary to bring in such soap-opera categories as premium
and non-premium or essential and non-essential. We can use a simple alternative
approach.
It was a character in an Oscar Wilde play who remarked that a cynic is a man who
knows the price of everything and the value of nothing. This may be an odd definition
of a cynic but it is not an unfair caricature of an orthodox economist like my colleague
Mr MacQuedy. For him, it is natural to ask how the value of something could be
determined, except by reference to the price that people are actually prepared to pay
for it. Prima facie at least, what is useful or valuable can be identified only on the
basis of demonstrated willingness to pay.
This does not make Mr MacOuedy a heartless monster. The real point he is trying to
make can be illustrated with another energy- related example. At the time of the
second oil crisis of 1979-80, a suggestion was made by the Road Haulage Association
that the British government should adopt a new policy in relation to petroleum and
‘consider reducing or abandoning its use for non-transport purposes’. The argument
was twofold: first, that other users of oil could get by without it, albeit in some cases

5

with difficulty, while transport could not; and second, that transport was an essential
service. Although British Gas Corporation terminology was not actually used,
transport was identified in effect as the only premium use for oil.
Suppose a government accepted this line of argument. What would it do? It could
issue regulations forbidding the use of petroleum products for certain specified
purposes. It could go further, by allowing petroleum products to be bought only under
licence, and arranging over time to issue these licences only for transport uses.
Let us imagine a comprehensive licensing system, which establishes a particular
allocation or pattern of usage for oil—an allocation which has been decided centrally,
according to the government’s assessment of priorities. Is there any way of deciding
whether a better allocation is possible? Indeed, there is. If a particular user, X, found
it worth while to buy and use a few extra tons of oil at the going price, and if at the
same time another user, Y, found it worth while to sell that same amount, then both
would be better off, in their own estimation at least, if the exchange between them
took place. Even within the constraints of an allocation system, the exchange could
take place if we allowed user Y to sell to user X his Licence to buy that amount. Since
no one else would be made worse off by such private transactions, the new allocation
can be judged, and would be judged by Mr MacQuedy and me, to be better than the
initial one. Moreover, it would still be judged better however X and Y used the oil.
The fact that some Minister or high-level committee has decided that one use is
essential, premium or high priority, while another use is inessential, non-premium or
low priority, is beside the point. The point is that the new allocation, based on
demonstrated willingness to pay, makes a given amount of oil more valuable than it
was before.
Let me take the story of X and Y a little further. It is more than likely that both were
in the market before, and both are in the market afterwards. These are not all-ornothing Micawberist decisions. In the new situation as compared with the old one, X
buys and uses rather more, and Y rather less. It can therefore be said of this
transaction - and the same applies to most transactions within an economic system that it takes place at the margin. The criterion which orthodox economics suggests, in
this case and more generally, is not simply that of willingness to pay: it is willingness
to pay at the margin.
Individualism as a Principle
You will see that in my examples the willingness to pay is that of individual agents
within the economic system—people, , businesses or non-profit-making
organisations. For Mr MacQuedy, it is their judgment as to what is valuable, guided
by their conception of their own interests, that should decide the pattern of use, rather
than the judgment of Ministers and government officials in this sense, orthodox
economics is ‘individualist’. Situations and measures are judged in terms of their
effects on the welfare of individuals, whose preferences are made effective through
market transactions by virtue of demonstrated willingness to pay.
Now, it can be objected, quite reasonably, that this pro-market, anti-soap-opera case,
as set out in the context of the examples I have given, depends on the assumption that
individual buyers and sellers are good judges of their own interests. If not, then the
mere fact that a voluntary exchange makes both parties to it better off in their own

6

estimation does not establish chat the exchange would lead to a genuine improvement.
A sceptic could point out that it is easy to think of lawful purchases by individuals—
of alcohol and tobacco, for instance—which might be better not made; that there are
important areas of choice, such as health care, where consumers are often neither
well-informed nor dispassionate; and that people, and even businesses, may be
swayed by advertising and other persuasive influences to act in ways that do not
reflect their best interests.
Mr MacQuedy does not deny any of these possibilities. Briefly, his reply is this. It is
certainly the case that individuals are not always or necessarily good judges of where
their interests lie. However, there are wide areas of economic life within which they
are at least more competent to judge them than an official agency could be. In the case
of oil, for example, it is a reasonable presumption that individual users, such as the
members of the British Road Haulage Association, can judge better than government
departments how best to lay out their own money to serve theft own ends. Voluntary
transactions between individuals help them to acquire knowledge and experience that
make them better judges of theft interests. In this connection, as in others, advertising
can serve a useful function. Another point is that considerations of individual liberty
are involved, as well as economic calculations of gain and loss. Lastly, Mr MacQuedy
would argue that such admittedly difficult issues should not be decided by the
arbitrary labels and categories of economic soap opera.
Let me add that MacQuedy’s criterion of individual willingness to pay at the margin
is not to be insisted on in all conceivable circumstances. As short-term expedients
particularly, administrative measures have their uses. In a period of drought a
prohibition on washing cars may be justified. the more so if water supplies are not
metered. If power supplies have to be reduced in an emergency, it makes good sense
to give priority to hospitals, without asking each hospital administrator how much he
would be prepared to pay in order to avoid being cut off. All that orthodoxy suggests
is that the criterion should be relied on as a general rule, and extended as widely as
practicable.
Markets, Rationing and Justice
Mr MacQuedy, then, is neither heartless nor dogmatic. All the same, can his criterion
be squared with a sense of justice? It is often argued that ‘rationing by the purse’
causes poor consumers to be squeezed out, and that they should be guaranteed
minimum supplies of essentials at reasonable prices. Let me comment on this, both
with reference to energy examples and more generally.
in the first place, it is worth noting that questions of inequality and poverty need not
be involved at all. Administrative modes of allocation are not necessarily, or even
usually, designed to benefit the poor. Suppose, for example that petrol is rationed
through the issue of coupons in so far as the interests of the poor are to count, the
right course of action would be to allocate coupons to demonstrably poor people,
whether or not they are owners of motor vehicles, and allow them to sell any coupons
they wish for the best prices they can get. But most vehicle owners would regard this
as grossly unfair; and so far as I know, all past schemes of petrol rationing in every
country have assigned ration coupons only to vehicle owners and operators. This
illustrates a point to which I will return, namely that poverty and inequality are not the
only aspects of economic justice that governments have to consider.

7

There is a strongly held view that the interests of the poor should be protected through
special low-cost provision of items like food, clothing, shelter and fuel. But if this is
such a sound principle, why is it so rarely adopted? With one significant exception,
subsidised public housing, special low-cost allocation schemes are not widely used or
officially favoured in economically developed democratic countries. In Britain,
governments of both parties have taken the view that the problems of poverty and
economic inequality should be dealt with more directly—the problem of poverty
through cash transfers within the social security system, and inequality through the
system of taxation as well as social security. Manipulating the prices of basic goods
and services for this purpose is frowned on. Here is a statement of this rather marketorientated philosophy, taken from the 1978 White Paper on the British nationalised
industries issued by the last Labour government:
The government intends that the nationalised industries will not be
forced into deficits by restraints on their prices. When help has to be
given to poorer members of the community it will be given primarily
through the social security and taxation system, and not by subsidising
nationalised industry prices.
Thus it is a mistake to think that in the debate between orthodoxy and intuitive
economics the issues chiefly involved are those of poverty and inequality. The
question of who will lose and who will gain from particular policies, and how these
gains and losses should be weighed is always pertinent. But there is no presumption
that the actual measures taken by present-day governments on the basis of soap
operatic or other DIYE criteria have either the intention or the effect of helping the
poor.
In so far as individual willingness to pay at the margin is taken as a guide to action,
administrative restrictions on the freedom to buy and sell are put in question; and so
also is any form of administrative rationing—whether through coupons, permits,
licences or queues. In my examples, the most valuable use for oil could be achieved,
without resort to licences or restrictions, largely by allowing prices to act as a
rationing device. If, however, there was some particular reason for issuing licences,
much the same allocation could be brought about by putting the licences up to
auction. In any case, whether they have been auctioned or not, allowing licences to be
freely bought or sold would keep open opportunities for improving whatever the
allocation happened to be.
It is easy to think of real-life situations in which it would be possible to put greater
reliance on the test of individual willingness to pay. Why not assign all licences for oil
companies to operate in the North Sea on the basis of sealed bid auctions, instead of
just a few as at present? Given that milk quotas have been imposed on British dairy
farmers under European Community regulations, is there scope for enabling these
quotas to be freely bought and sold? Could housing problems be eased by phasing out
rent controls and allowing council tenants the right to sell their own leases? These and
similar questions are provoked by the kind of argument that I have been sketching
out. The orthodox economic approach does not in itself provide ready-made definitive
answers for them. It offers a guiding principle, the principle being that markets should
be enabled to function effectively, so that scarce resources will be put to their most

8

productive use. Orthodox economics is, in a word, market-oriented. A not entirely
respectful term coined by an economist friend and former colleague of mine, Paul
Streeten, can be applied to Mr MacQuedy and me: we are price mechanists’.
Outside the rather disorderly ranks of the economics profession, this is not a popular
creed. It is rare to find a government that is prepared to auction licences and quotas, or
allow them to be freely tradable. Public opinion often supports governments in this,
and is in general suspicious of the idea that markets should be allowed to operate
freely. In the next two lectures also, I shall be concerned with issues on which Mr
MacQuedy and I are conscious of being very much in a minority.

9

