REITH LECTURES 1986: Law, Justice and Democracy
Lord McCluskey
Lecture 2: The Clanking of Medieval Chains
TRANSMISSION: 12 November 1986 – Radio 4

In the first lecture I undertook to look at the role of our judges and at the character of
our judiciary. I did so because we need to understand these matters in order to make a
reliable judgment about whether or not we should confer upon judges a more active, a
more interventionist role. Should we augment their power to make and unmake law?
Should we empower them to review and even overrule laws made by Parliament?
So I asked what judges do; and reminded you that they decide the cases that happen to
come before them. Of course they don’t sit under a palm tree deciding each case as
the fancy takes them or even as their subjective sense of justice suggests. They decide
according to law. Law and justice are not the same thing. Justice is an abstract ideal
whose precise content in any particular dispute is uncertain and debatable. By
contrast, law is a kind of system, a collection of principles, makeshifts, fictions and
expedients, none of them unchangeable, and most varying in character depending on
the time and the place. So, at the simplest level, law is a tool designed to enable men
to sculpt justice out of the raw material of life.
But it would be naive to rest content with that description. Law is a social instrument.
It embodies and enforces moral, social, political, cultural and economic choices. It
translates these choices into rules which are intended to realise both ultimate and
intermediate social goals. It compromises these choices when they come into conflict.
Often the choice is difficult and painful. A judge may find himself restricted to
choosing which is the lesser of the two evils. So the links between justice and law are
sometimes tenuous and indistinct. In a society like the United States of America, the
law may be fashioned to uphold an individual liberal goal, such as freedom of
speech—though it may achieve that goal unevenly—and sometimes people have to
pay a heavy price when others exercise that freedom. In the Soviet Union, by contrast,
the law closely censors individual expression, supposedly in the interests of some
overriding public purpose. So again, at a price, the law is fashioned to achieve an end
which is political in character. No doubt apologists for each system would claim that
the object of the law was to realise some social purpose which, if pursued with
sufficient vigour, opens the door to real justice. What would not be in dispute is that
law is just a means to an end.
Individual judges in either country may not refer to justice by name, but, when
applying the law to individual cases, the judges will claim, less pretentiously, to be
acting in the public interest. It is hardly different in a society such as ours, where the
boundary between free speech and restraint is jagged and indistinct: the Law provides
particular tools, such as obscenity, contempt; official secrets, blasphemy and
defamation, and judicial notions of the public interest guide the hands that wield the
tools. But just as the public interest’ will not have the same meaning in different
societies, it will not necessarily have the same content for different judges. In fact, a

1

concept such as the public interest—like so many other broad concepts that open the
door to judicial discretion—is imprecise and elastic, and compels the judge to make
value-judgments which are not wholly dependent upon the letter of the law.
So the next question is: how do judges think? Only a cynic would put the preliminary
question: do judges think? But, as we brush aside the cynic’s question, we should
acknowledge that the application of the law to the facts in order to produce a decisive
result does require thought. The contested and difficult case is almost always unique.
The result is not preordained. The judge has to think what result the law indicates for
these litigants in this case. And, when the law allows some room for choice, he has to
think of principled reasons why he should make the choice he does.
So, how do judges think? Now if I were to ask, ‘how do Americans think?’ or ‘how
do engineers think?’ you would instantly point out that there is no reason to suppose
that all Americans think the same way. Or all engineers. Or even all or most
American engineers. And, of course, it is equally true of judges. They think in
different ways. Like the engineers, they must draw upon some common and agreed
body of principles, though the principles available to judges, being man-made, are
more flexible and can be altered. Judges must disclose their thinking. They advance
reasons to justify their decisions. And what is most striking about those cases—
usually the most difficult, the most contentious, the most celebrated cases, in which
several judges, or even several different levels of court in the appeal hierarchy,
disclose their reasoning—is that the several judges give different reasons. Indeed,
they frequently arrive at different results; and inevitably, when that happens, the
reasons must be different.
In truth, and to state the matter comprehensively, they can arrive at the same result for
the same reasons; they can arrive at the same result for different reasons; they can
arrive at different results for different reasons; and—just occasionally—they can
come to different results for what look like the same reasons. So, if we can assume
that the judges are impartial, intelligent and logical and are searching for the legal
answers within the same shared corpus of principles and precedents, with a view to
applying the same law to the established facts, we are driven to the conclusion that the
application of the law to the facts is not a self-contained logical process. Judges
frequently say, when they give their reasons, that they have been driven or compelled
or forced to come to a particular conclusion, sometimes without difficulty, sometimes
with regret, sometimes with considerable doubt or hesitation; only to hear their
colleagues announce that they have been driven, compelled, forced down a different
road to a different conclusion. Thus, despite the common principles, despite a
mountain of precedents, despite a tradition of trying to write into Acts of Parliament
precise answers to all foreseeable situations, the judge is left remarkably free to
follow his own route to his own conclusion. If I am right, in suggesting that the law
and logic leave judges a freedom of choice which is real, both as to the result and as
to the reasoning which is adduced to justify the result, does the reasoning contained in
the written opinions of judges tell us the whole story? Or are there other assumptions,
other considerations, other suppositions disclosed or undisclosed, visible or invisible,
which judges individually or collectively hold to be self-evident and which are just as
important as the close, analytical reasoning in which such opinions are so rich?
The Snail in the Ginger-Beer

2

Let me look again at the celebrated case of Mrs Donoghue, who drank some gingerbeer which a friend had poured into a tumbler from a dark-brown bottle. When the
tumbler was being refilled, a dead snail floated out of the bottle. Mrs Donoghue was
distressed. Seeking compensation for her upset, she pursued a case against the
manufacturer who had sold the café proprietor the dark, sealed bottle containing both
the beverage and the dead snail. Her claim raised a pure question of law: if the
manufacturer of an article intends it to reach the consumer in the same state as he
despatches it, without any opportunity for an intermediate inspection, does he owe to
the consumer a duty to take care to ensure that the article is free from defect likely to
cause injury? The law to be laid down for the manufacturer who bottled Mrs
Donoghue’s ginger-beer was going to be the law for every manufacturer whose
product was intended to reach the consumer without intermediate inspection.
And it could not logically be confined to manufacturers: the same principle should
apply to those who negligently designed, constructed or even repaired buildings or
machinery, or even to those, such as bankers or accountants, who expressed and
communicated an expert opinion, and, by doing so, set in train a chain of events
resulting in loss to persons to whom the opinion was communicated, even if these
were persons with whom they had not contracted but who had placed reliance on the
experts’ care and skill.
So Mrs Donoghue’s case raised the spectre—or the bright new dawn—of product
liability. In trying to derive a principled answer, the judges of the House of Lords
analysed over 30 precedents, cases from different times and various countries. When
the decision was announced, those precedents that fitted the result for which a judge
would vote were quoted with approval. Those that did not fit were said to be different
or were rejected contemptuously with words like those of Lord Buck- master: ‘Better
that they should he buried so securely that their perturbed spirits shall no longer vex
the law.’
When it came to the principles of the law, the judges were equally divided. Some
thought it would be ‘little short of outrageous’ to hold manufacturers liable to the
victims of their negligence: Lord Tomlin reminded their lordships of a recent railway
disaster—caused, apparently, by a defective axle—and expressed dismay at the
possibility that the victims of the crash might be able to sue the manufacturers of the
axle. Where would it all end? Others could see nothing but justice and common sense
in a rule of law which made the careless manufacturer compensate those who were
injured as a result of his carelessness. By a majority of only one vote, the judges of
the House of Lords reversed the decision of the lower court, and chose to uphold the
principle that the manufacturer was liable to the consumer for his negligence: and
soon that principle came to be seen and almost universally accepted as the
embodiment of obvious common sense. But no one reading the written opinions of the
judges and observing the rhetorical passion of the language used can be left with any
doubt that the decision was not wholly dependent upon the reasoning, that the judges
rationalised and pleaded like advocates for the view they had formed. The case is a
striking example of how a mountain of precedents still leaves judges free not only to
evolve or restrict a principle but even to create or destroy one. And of how judges,
with precisely the same starting materials in terms of fact and legal tradition, end up
crusading for diametrically opposite conclusions.

3

It is not often that judges reveal the depth and character of their differences by
resorting to such colourful and polemical language; but even when their
disagreements are couched in the most urbane terms, the disagreements themselves
are often highly significant. And not all disagreements reach the surface. If a court
sees itself as an instrument of government or as the trustee or the promoter of some
important public purpose, it may try to produce a united front, by delivering one
opinion, called the Opinion of the Court. In the United States Supreme Court,
unanimity had to be fought for by argument, negotiation, compromise and diplomacy
before Chief Justice Earl Warren could announce the unanimous result in Brown vs.
The Board of Education. This was the landmark case in 1954 in which the Supreme
Court held that the segregation of white and black schoolchildren in the public
schools of a state violated the constitutional rights of black children. These rights had
been created in 1868 by the 14th amendment to the American Constitution, after the
North’s victory in the Civil War. The Court refused to follow earlier decisions in
which it had been ruled that racial segregation by public authorities was permitted by
the Constitution. It was plain to the judges who took part in the case that to declare
such segregation unconstitutional was to announce a revolution, to lay down a new
law which millions of people and many states might resist, evade and even disobey;
the force and authority of the new law would be gravely weakened if the Court did not
speak with a single voice. So the unanimity of the Court became of the greatest
importance, second in importance only to the making of the decision itself.
That is an example of judges making unanimity itself a goal in order to avoid
weakening the authority of the court’s decision, an acceptance by judges of what, in
political terms, would be called collective responsibility for what they realised was a
decision of enormous political and social importance.
That, of course, is America. Our courts hardly exercise comparable governmental
functions: the lack of unanimity among our judges matters less and seldom attracts
attention. And disagreements do not always emerge: if the case is dull, if the court is
one from which there is no appeal, or if the judge who disagrees does not feel
sufficiently strongly to sit down and write out a detailed dissent. But, despite the
various influences that might discourage a declaration of dissent, the differences that
can emerge are remarkable. In the snail in the ginger-beer case, the judges were
almost evenly split as to the result. In Mrs Gillick’s case the nine judges who
considered the case split 5:4 in favour of Mrs Gillick, but in the House of Lords the
voting was 3:2 against her. She lost. In the case in which the Defence Secretary
sought delivery from the Guardian of documents which Sarah Tisdall had copied and
leaked to that newspaper, the House of Lords split 3:2 against the Guardian. And in a
case in 1971, no three of the five judges who had heard the case in the House of Lords
could agree. So Lord Diplock, in order, as he said, to avoid discredit on the
administration of justice in the United Kingdom, voted with two other judges in order
to provide a majority, even though he disagreed with their opinion.
Responding to Choice
So, judges do think. They study the results of earlier cases and the reasons given by
the judges for reaching those results; they seek to discover and to articulate the
principles which those earlier judges must be deemed to have had in their minds when
they reasoned their ways to the results in those cases. But judges are not engaging in
some inexorable exercise in which every choice is determined by existing law. Choice

4

there is, but often not the choice between the right answer and the wrong answer.
Between them, law, reason and discretion leave judges free to declare results which
derive at least in part from philosophies, attitudes and influences which are not
themselves rules of law. It is unnecessary for me to assess the argument advanced by
others that the judiciary is biased in its choices and prejudiced in its decisions because
of the narrow social, educational and professional background which most judges
share. It is enough to acknowledge that no one can be entirely free of the perspectives
and assumptions that derive from his background. No matter what the law puts into a
novel case, a judge can always take a little more out. So, although judges do not
normally profess to legislate, it is inescapable that courts make law. The common law
was made by judges. Every time a court determines the result in a particular case by
redefining and developing legal principles and rules in such as way as to ensure that
they will govern future cases, it is performing a function which resembles the
legislative function. Let me illustrate this.
Parliament legislated that when damages for personal injury were being calculated,
certain sums received by way of invalidity pension were to be deducted from the
plaintiffs damages. By contrast, the judges of the House of Lords, in deciding a case,
ruled that certain sums received by a plaintiff by way of disability pension were not to
be taken into account in calculating his damages. So we have a rule made by
Parliament and a rule made by the judges. In each instance, a law-making body has
laid down a new rule which is to have general application to all similar cases that arise
in the future. That is equally true of many rules laid down by the courts. Both courts
and Parliament are capable of creating, amending and repealing rules of quite general
application. So let me illustrate how judges come to make law— bearing in mind that
there are few areas in which judges are constitutionally incapable of making new law,
though Parliament often tries to legislate unambiguously and comprehensively,
leaving no gaps for the judges to fill. That has not proved easy.
One branch of law extensively developed in hard-fought litigation over the last 150
years is that governing the rights to compensation of persons injured by the actions of
others. The courts developed and applied the idea that certain people owed to other
people particular duties. If those who owed the duties neglected to perform them and
so caused injury to those to whom the duties were owed, the victims were entitled to
recover monetary compensation from those whose neglect caused the injury. Thus the
essential basis of the right to damages for personal injury was wrongdoing or fault—
not fault in some abstract sense but fault consisting of breach of duty. So the courts
had to decide if everybody owed duties to everybody else, or if there were limits.
Were duties owed only by those who had, by entering into a contract, voluntarily
entered into a relationship with others; or could there be duties apart altogether from
contract? If an accident were brought about by several contributory causes, was the
author of each cause responsible for the loss in whole, in part, or not at all? What if
the victim himself were partly responsible? Should his fault, however small, absolve
the other wrongdoers? Or should it simply reduce his right to compensation
proportionately? Should people have to answer for the negligent acts of their
servants? And what if the servants injured one another, was the master going to have
to compensate a servant injured by the negligence of a fellow servant? Was the owner
to be held liable for the damage done by his dog or his pet tiger? Was a proprietor to
be held liable if dry rot spread from his house to an adjacent one, or his dam burst and
flooded his neighbour’s land? Well, of course, there are thousands of such questions.

5

And it would have been an inconceivable effort of the imagination for lawyers,
politicians, industrialists or anyone else to sit down and anticipate all the questions.
What happened was that the courts waited until people brought contested claims and
the resolution of each contest required the answering of the questions raised. Life after
the Industrial Revolution—the growth of mechanical transport systems and the
creation of huge urban working populations exposed to dangerous processes—was not
slow in throwing up the questions. It might have been possible to try to enact codes of
law from which the answers might be deduced. But that was not the way Victorian
Britain faced up to the challenge of the new questions.
The British answer was to trust the judges. It was not so much a conscious decision as
a default decision. And the judges were, as judges always are, creatures of their time,
class and background, influenced and conditioned by their knowledge and their
ignorance, their beliefs and their prejudices, intellectually indebted to Saint Paul and
Adam Smith but not too familiar with mines, factories and docks. Thus equipped, they
provided answers to whatever questions the cases put. People may talk about the
edifice of the common law, but there was no grand design. It was erected a brick at a
time. The doctrine of precedent saw to that. In so far as there were or were thought to
be blueprints, they consisted of vague and imprecise notions, like the natural law or
common sense. if there were conscious borrowings from developed and coherent
systems, they were borrowings from old systems, such as the Roman law or the canon
law, which had themselves evolved out of the experience and perceptions of different
peoples, different times, different societies. And the principles and jurisprudential
concepts that other societies had slowly fashioned were adapted to give some
coherence to the developing system.
Judges brought to the task a strong sense that, collectively, they were able to draw
upon an infinite reservoir of natural law and right reason, of good custom and sound
common sense. Their paths to that reservoir had been lighted by generations of wise
men, mostly other judges, whose decisions and reasoning were to be accorded the
highest respect. And the law, because of its origins and its antiquity, was perceived to
be wiser than men, especially men who were not judges; and not just wiser but surer.
Modern judges, unlike their predecessors, have had to learn to live with Parliament’s
inexhaustible drive to make and unmake law in all fields. But the traditions of the
powerful, inspired judiciary endure. They have been seen from time to time in the
judges’ reluctance to give effect to legislation restricting common law rights. They
may be seen in the pleas to trust the judges. In the last 35 years they have emerged
strikingly in the judges’ rediscovery of judicial review.
The Recovery of Old Rights
What the judges did was to resurrect and develop old forms of remedy to enable
citizens to challenge infringements of their rights, especially infringements by public
officials. This is the process known as judicial review of administrative action, or
administrative review. Essentially, what the judges did was to turn their attention to a
field in which they were the real experts: the field of remedies. They did not assert
that they were creating new rights; they just claimed to be discovering ways of giving
people access to rights which had lain unused because nobody could reach them. The
judges did not stock the shelves; they merely unlocked the glass door behind which
the rights sat, tantalisingly unobtainable. There were good historical precedents for
proceeding in this un-dramatic fashion. Any lawyer appreciates that by providing

6

ways of asserting rights, the judges have armed the citizen with rights that he did not
know he had. Not only that; because once the rediscovered judicial tools for
administrative review became known and widely used, the grounds for administrative
review increased and multiplied. And government ministers and other public officials
to whom Parliament had delegated wide power and discretion suddenly found that
judges were once again prepared to police their use of power and discretion.
There is, no doubt, a long way to go yet, and it is possible to detect some unevenness
in the readiness of judges to use their new jurisdiction. It is by no means easy to
predict when the judges will step in and when they will stand back and decline to
intervene. In one case, concerning the statutory guidance issued by the Secretary of
State on local authorities’ expenditure, the court declined to examine the detail of the
guidance or its consequences, stating that it could do so only if it appeared that the
Secretary of State had acted in bad faith or for an improper motive or had taken leave
of his senses. But in Mrs Gillick’s case the same court made a most minute
examination of guidance issued by the Department of Health and Social Security
although no such suggestion was made. On most occasions the court has explicitly
confined itself to technical matters about how public officials have gone about
exercising their responsibilities; but sometimes they have looked deeply into the
factual basis of the decisions the officials have taken. We see here echoes of the
continuing debate that has exercised the United States Supreme Court for over a
century, about the meaning of the words ‘due process’ in the 14th amendment. In
some cases the courts have seemed to encourage those who seek judicial review of
administrative action. But in a recent case the court expressed itself troubled at what
was described as ‘the prolific use of judicial review’ to challenge the performance by
local authorities of their functions under the Homeless Persons Act, 1977. In some
cases they have allowed attempts to challenge public administration to be choked by
what the layman would see as technicalities. In others, the technicalities have
presented no insuperable obstacle. So precisely how the courts will finally define the
character and limits of their rediscovered jurisdiction is still uncertain. But its recent
history illustrates that judges are still prepared to engage in what Lord Wilberforce
described as cautious legislation’, even when, as its supporters claim, the judges are
‘up to their necks in policy’, and disobeying Acts of Parliament. Most commentators
credit the judges with being on the side of the angels, exercising what English judges
see as their neglected but historical role of shielding the subject from attempts by the
executive to encroach upon his liberty. It is also possible to interpret what is being
done as signalling a rebellious stand against Parliamentary sovereignty, a move by the
courts to reoccupy constitutional ground conceded by earlier generations of judges to
the electorate.
For judges to ensure that administrators stay within their statutory powers is one
thing; to tell Parliament that it is abusing its sovereign power would be quite another.
I believe that the underlying notion that our judges have a special gift for
dispassionately applying a law older, wiser and surer than the laws that pour out of
ever-changing Parliaments has led some to support the argument that there should be
enacted an entrenched Bill of Rights, one which would enable the judiciary to engage
in a wider judicial review, and strike down primary legislation if it failed to come up
to the standards of the new natural law, as encapsulated in the Bill. So it is worth
considering how the law made by judges compares with that made by elected
Parliaments. And it is to that I shall turn next.

7

