REITH LECTURES 1986: Law, Justice and Democracy
Lord McCluskey
Lecture 5: An Enormous Power
TRANSMISSION: 3 December 1986 – Radio 4

Though it is clear that there are wider arguments about the wisdom of enacting an
enduring constitutional document containing a selection of rights, intended to be
overriding or fundamental, my principal purpose is to consider the effect of such a
step upon the role of the judiciary, and indeed upon the law itself. In doing so I should
make clear my belief that, although the historical, legal and constitutional differences
between the United States and the United Kingdom are considerable, there are some
lessons that we can learn from American experience that we cannot learn anywhere
else.
But, before I attempt to show why that is so, let me remind you that the essential
constitutional difference between our higher judicial system and that of the United
States is that American judges are the guardians and interpreters of a written
constitution. That constitution, containing the Bill of Rights, has long been regarded
as a living source of philosophy and principle. It contains the text of a supreme law
which provides the legal warrant for judges to make enduring social and political
choices. By contrast, our judges, whatever the social or political implications of their
lawmaking, are in no sense the final arbiters of such choices. Whatever law they
create is at the immediate disposal of Parliament. The mistakes our judges make are
not woven into the fabric of a supreme law beyond the reach of the legislature. The
same applies to their achievements. Their finest works are, at least in theory, able to
be swept away by a sovereign Parliament. This perception of the theoretical
vulnerability both of the law’s treasury of individual rights and of our essential
constitutional machinery has led some to advocate a new constitutional settlement,
designed and constructed to be proof against being dismantled by a temporary elected
majority. A vital ingredient of such a settlement would be a statement of selected
basic rights. If I am right in believing that such a change would make our judges
perform tasks for which they are not equipped, and risk drawing them into the
political arena in a way alien to the best traditions of the judiciary, we must before
embarking upon it be satisfied that the change is reasonably necessary. As Murphy ’s
Law says: ‘If a thing ain’t broke, don’t fix it.’
The countries which have inherited the Common Law tradition and which also
practise multi-party representative democracy have, for the most part, managed
hitherto to do without entrenched Bills of Rights. Canada’s Charter of Rights and
Freedoms was brought into force in April 1982 by an Act passed by the Westminster
Parliament. But section 15, the important provision relating to equality rights, did not
come into effect until April 1985. Quebec has exercised its right to disapply important
parts of the Charter. In the first four years, the Supreme Court of Canada heard
argument in just over 30 Charter cases and delivered judgment in 13. Arguments
based on Charter Rights have, of course, been advanced in many hundreds of cases,
mostly criminal, in lower courts; but until the Supreme Court of Canada has decided

1

many more Charter cases, it will be impossible to assess its real impact upon the law,
or upon the role of the judges. So it is still too early to assess the accuracy of one
senator’s prediction that the Charter would provide a ‘field-day for crackpots, a pain
in the neck for judges and legislators and a goldmine for lawyers’. But it is already
possible to see that it is adding materially to the caseload of the courts and the
workload of lawyers. Or, to put it another way, it is adding to the delay, the cost and
the uncertainty of litigation.
In New Zealand, the Bill of Rights debate began in the 1960s. In 1985 the Minister of
Justice presented to the House of Representatives a White Paper containing a draft
Bill of Rights for New Zealand. The draft Bill owes much to the Canadian Charter; it
draws heavily upon the experience of Canada and the United States. The first point
that strikes the United Kingdom observer is that New Zealand has no second House of
Parliament to act as a check upon the elected House of Representatives. So if that
House, while under the control of an elected majority, chose to pass legislation which
abolished or overrode the constitutional conventions—for example, by prolonging the
life of that elected chamber without the inconvenience of having to face the electorate
in a general election—there would be no proven and effective mechanisms to prevent
it. And equally, it would be able, in theory, to make massive inroads into civil and
human rights. The powers of the Governor-General or the courts of New Zealand to
restrain such actions are, it is said, untested and uncertain, and might well prove to be
ineffectual. This argument resembles Lord Hailsham’s assertion, made about the
British House of Commons, that it is an ‘instrument of tyranny’. The point may be
theoretically sound for the House of Representatives in New Zealand, though not for
the British House of Commons, which cannot abolish the House of Lords. But this
much is clear; that in New Zealand the Bill of Rights argument is closely bound up
with the argument that the country needs a constitution which cannot be dismantled
by an executive commanding an absolute majority in a sovereign unicameral
legislature. In acknowledging this strand in the thinking we can see that when Lord
Scarman advocated in 1974 the enactment of a Bill of Rights for the United Kingdom
it was no accident that he also advocated a new constitutional settlement. Indeed,
many would argue—and I believe—that, in the United Kingdom, effective
entrenchment of a Bill of Rights is integral with and inseparable from a new
constitutional settlement. That consideration, in itself, raises the question as to
whether we in the United Kingdom are ready to engage in a great constitutional
debate so soon after the abortive arguments about devolution in the 1970s.
The example of New Zealand points to another factor that is relevant to the Bill of
Rights argument: the presence in the country of native, indigenous peoples, whose
ancestors were there when Europeans arrived to dominate the country. The same
phenomenon is found in the United States and in Canada. The history of the treatment
by the settlers and their descendants of the native peoples is in no case a history which
those who now live in these countries can recall with pride.
Denial of Rights
In all cases both the history books and the law books record the denial to native
peoples of the full rights accorded to those of European stock. In the United States,
both for the native peoples and for the imported slaves and their descendants,
discrimination was widespread and severe. The Bill of Rights was not written for
them. And I suspect that those who practised discrimination against one oppressed

2

minority found it increasingly easy to discriminate against other minorities. The
distaste of civilised men for these injustices led, after the Civil War, to attempts to
outlaw them by writing into the fundamental law of the country declarations of
equality before the law. In the United Kingdom, where slavery was illegal since at
least the 18th century, discrimination was practised and legalised against various
religious, racial and cultural groups, but equality before the law was the general
principle of the Common Law: the many exceptions, usually enacted by a nondemocratic Parliament, have gradually been reduced by the legislature and the
ordinary courts. The position today is that the law professes the principle of equality;
and, although at a social and private level, discrimination and prejudice still exist; the
law itself does not in principle deny equality to minority groups in the claiming of
their fundamental human rights and immunities. Of course, most of us would
acknowledge or even protest about particular instances which illustrate that to be a
female or a homosexual or a member of some ethnic or religious minority carries with
it certain economic, cultural or other disadvantages, including legal ones, but my
point is that the fundamental human rights made available in other Common Law
democracies, by the entrenchment of specific and general rights, are not withheld by
law in the United Kingdom. Nor is there any political party likely to win power that
seeks to deny such rights to such groups. I do not argue that our treatment of
minorities is exemplary; merely that our record will stand comparison with that of the
USA, where the constitution has always professed freedom and equality.
In New Zealand, the authors of the White Paper, while acknowledging that no
government or parliament is likely in the foreseeable future to attempt to sweep away
basic rights already recognised by law there, argues that it is much better not to wait
for a flood before we build the dam. That may sound sensible; but it cannot mean that
we should start building dams in places where there is no foreseeable risk of flood.
The conclusion that I would suggest on this point is that, in our society, the absence
from our recent history of institutionalised discrimination having its formal origins in
the law, and the absence of any recent history of an unholy alliance between the
lawmakers and oppressors, make it unnecessary to enact a Bill of Rights to betoken a
national repentance for the sins of our forefathers: or to protect us against non-existent
threats. The threat of the flood is too remote to warrant the building of a legal dam.
The mechanisms of our existing legal and political structures can handle all the
foreseeable rainfall.
It would be a bold man who would argue that the Bills of Rights, applied or
contemplated in democratic societies whose Common Law is comparable to ours, can
succeed in preserving the fundamental rights of the citizens in those countries more
effectively than does the ordinary law, as applied in the United Kingdom. No legal
mechanisms entrenched or not, are perfect. No legal system is going to satisfy
everybody. No protagonist of the Bill of Rights would argue that it is the gateway to
the Promised Land. The practical issues are whether it is necessary, and whether its
advantages outweigh its disadvantages—for us. And, in weighing that balance, we
should not lose sight of the fact that one of the supposed virtues of a Bill of Rights,
the securing—by court decision—of particular rights, can prove illusory. The
Supreme Court in Washington can and does overrule its previous decisions. As the
composition of the court changes under President Reagan it appears likely that more
of the great liberal decisions of the Warren era will be reversed; or as one American

3

critic put it, ‘left twisting in the wind’. A Supreme Court can diminish as well as
enlarge rights.
In order to provide a degree of flexibility, the Canadian Charter, in common with
other modern Bills of Rights, provides that the rights of freedoms it contains are
subject to ‘such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified
in a free and democratic society’. But to whom is the legislator to demonstrate such
justification? The answer is: the judges. It is the judges who are ultimately to decide
what is reasonable and justified in a free and democratic society. Why it should be
supposed that elderly lawyers with cautious and backward-looking habits of thought
are qualified to overrule the judgments of democratically elected legislators as to what
is, in the circumstances of the time, justified, I do not profess to understand. In New
Zealand, the protagonists of a Bill of Rights do not seek to conceal that this central
provision gives judges the ultimate responsibility for deciding policy questions. And
where are their judges to look for guidance in the making of such policy choices?
Why, to Canada—to see how Canadian judges, operating a similarly elastic provision,
have created answers in the litigations of that country; and also the European Human
Rights Court, to the Commonwealth and to the United States. Of course, the opinions
of foreign courts are not to be binding. So the judges are left free to pick and choose
among the precedents.
There is no escape from the fact that a constitutional provision which gives judges a
substantial but ill-defined power to overrule the decisions of Parliament involves a
shift of power from elected representatives who are accountable to unelected
appointees who are not. To transfer such power to a body of professional specialists is
to abdicate a real measure of democratic responsibility. At the moment we are in the
odd position that although we have withheld such power from our own judges we
have provisionally conceded it to foreign judges by adhering to the European
Convention of Human Rights without incorporating it into our domestic law. So, as
the Sunday Times thalidomide case illustrates, the judges in Strasbourg are
empowered by the broad wording of the Convention to strike a different balance
between conflicting public interests. In that case, the conflict was between the public
interest in freedom of speech and the public interest in the administration of justice.
Our judges arrived at one answer. Strasbourg, with a different experience of the press
and of the administration of justice, concluded that the law, as declared by the House
of Lords, was an interference with freedom of expression, an interference which was
not necessary in a democratic society. The case is a telling example of how the
interpretation of vaguely worded rights can lead different judges to arrive at novel and
different conclusions as to the character and effect of the public interest argument. It
is also an example of a field of law in which Parliament itself, a good deal earlier,
should have made its own judgment and enacted it.
Some might seek to draw a distinction between a constitutional provision and an
entrenched right I would challenge the validity of any such distinction. The
fundamental rights secured and declared in the United States are secured and declared
by amendments to the constitution itself. If a document exists and it creates
entrenched rights and restrictions it does not matter what you call it. Provided that
some mechanism exists for altering the terms of the document, there here is no limit
to what can be put into it or taken out of if. It can, as in Ireland, be amended to allow
divorce or to deny it; as in America, to prohibit the sale of alcohol or to allow it, to

4

enlarge civil rights or to diminish them, to abolish capital punishment or to permit it.
If you can use the mechanism of amendment and command the necessary majorities,
you can put into or delete from this fundamental document any selection of rights or
restrictions, whatever their character or effect. Of course, amendment is never going
to be easy; but the campaigning for and against amendment, whether it is to do with
prohibiting the sale of alcohol or with divorce or abortion or contraception or capital
punishment or civil rights, demonstrates if demonstration be needed, that one citizen’s
right is another citizen’s restriction.
A Bill of Rights embodies semi-permanent choices between the conflicting interests
of citizens. And to present such choices as if they are the gratuitous enlargement of
the human rights of all is to misuse language. Rights are not to be regarded as if they
were roses without thorns. Any Bill of Rights which guarantees some rights and
denies or conspicuously omits others—for example, economic or cultural rights—is
entrenching one set of values at the expense of alternative sets of values, if those
whose task it was to select the rights to be protected were to be situated behind a veil
of ignorance, so that they did not know how the various alternatives would serve or
hinder different interests; if, therefore, they had to choose on the basis of timeless
principles acceptable to all right-thinking men; if they were clever enough to choose
golden words to express those rights, words so pure and unambiguous that no man, no
judge, who had to apply them to real life could possibly fail to ensure that the
principles they encapsulated would be applied fairly and equally to all men in all
circumstances, then no doubt they could fashion an honest charter of enduring
freedoms that would do more than just buttress the interests and values of one class
and one generation against the interests and values of their successors.
But how realistic is that hope? A Bill of Rights could serve certain interests and
prejudice others. Thus a provision about a right to life would, depending upon how it
was phrased by the draftsman and interpreted by the judges, favour one side or the
other in the abortion argument. It could hardly avoid doing so. A right of freedom of
association is bound to determine or to enable judges to determine, in some degree,
and possibly totally, the arguments about the closed shop and collective bargaining. If
rights are conferred upon but confined to human persons the results will be entirely
different from those which would flow from the conferring of rights upon corporate or
legal persons, such as limited companies or trade unions. The essential nature of
rights is that they restrict the freedom of those who must respect them. A child’s right
not to be caned is a restriction upon a teacher’s freedom to impose disciplinary
sanctions. A worker’s right not to join a trade union is a restriction upon the power of
his fellow workers to present collectively a monolithic united front to the employer. A
right to freedom of speech may be so large, so widely interpreted, that it interferes
with the right of accused persons to a fair trial, because it permits the press to publish
information which directly or more subtly prejudices the minds of potential jurors or
judges. A right to choose freely how one’s children are to be educated or one’s
illnesses are to be treated may confer advantages upon those who can afford to
exercise their choice, but leave those who cannot afford to do so with meaningless
paper rights. Indeed, the conferring of such rights in relation to education or health
care might gravely prejudice the capacity of the community as a whole to allocate and
distribute limited educational and health care resources in such a way as to benefit
those in need or those who can benefit, rather than those who can pay. The point of
offering such examples is not to indicate a preference for or against abortion, the

5

closed shop, private medicine or public schools. The point is that these matters, and
countless others, involve political choices. And their character does not alter be- cause
they are cast in the noble language of fundamental human rights.
The 18th Amendment
Bear in mind that one of the principal arguments for conferring certain rights in an
entrenched charter is that they should not be able to be disturbed by a temporary
political majority which in a parliamentary democracy commands the legislature and
executive for five or ten years. Of course that argument has some force; particularly
for those who cannot win such a majority, because it opens up for them a route for
obtaining and preserving rights which the majority want to modify or remove. But it
also means that if a particular coalition of interest groups can at the moment of
enactment of the charter win a sufficient majority to ensure that their interest is
secured and entrenched in the form of a charter right, then later parliamentary
majorities cannot adjust that and related rights in accordance with the wishes of the
majority. Charters of entrenched rights provide a favourable environment for the
single- issue fanatics, such as the American Prohibitionists in the 1920s. The 18th
Amendment introducing Prohibition has been described as the crowning achievement
of a movement which had become the ‘rallying-point of those who wished to save the
Republic from the corrupting effects of alcohol, the saloon, machine politics, jazz and
the movies, from all the sins which robbed the nation of its purity’.
Even if, when the charter is enacted, there is no consensus to frame a particular
interest as an explicit right, it may well be possible to smuggle it in, in a vague and
delphic form of words, leaving alive the hope that by interpretation judges will
ultimately make explicit that which the charter left obscure. So the power lies with the
judges. The real alternatives are not, on the one hand, some timeless noble document
which eloquently distils and expresses the best essence of civilised experience and, on
the other, an elective dictatorship abusing its temporary stewardship by trampling on
the rights of minorities.
What are the alternatives? On the one hand, we can make political choices and
buttress them against change—whether they are spelled out explicitly or left to be
teased out of the wording by the judges. On the other, we can leave such choices to be
made and remade, by elected representatives who must answer to the electorate for
their decisions. As time passes, the alternatives can truly become rule by the words of
yesterday’s charter majority as filtered through the minds of today’s judges versus
rule by today’s elected representatives.
To leave profound policy issues to judges in this way is to avoid a principled and fully
informed consideration by society itself of the problem of where in a civilised and
free society the lines fall to be drawn and the balances struck. If the judges are
required to put flesh on the bare bones of vaguely worded rights, where are they to
draw their inspiration from? They may choose to look at the United States, which has
had to address such questions; but they will find some funny answers. The Supreme
Court has had to consider, for example, what limits, if any, fall to be placed on the
freedom of speech guaranteed in the First Amendment and how that freedom can be
squared with the Sixth Amendment guarantee of a fair trial by an impartial jury or the
Fourteenth Amendment guarantee of due process. In the result, the media can carry
almost unrestricted information about the life and circumstances of a person who is to

6

face trial on criminal charges even though potential jurors may read that information
and be prejudiced by it. So it may take weeks to select a jury and it may have to
consist of people who read no newspapers and watch no television. We in Britain
would treat such publication as being in contempt of court, because we think that the
need to ensure a fair trial overrides the need to sell newspapers. Why should the
judgment of Parliament on such a matter be abdicated to judges, even if as our history
suggests, the judges would, in that particular case, probably make a good job of it?
Human Rights in the USA
In the United States, the judges have hardly been uniformly and conspicuously
successful, by comparison with the United Kingdom, in securing and extending
fundamental human rights and freedoms. What are held by some as the glittering
achievements of the United States Supreme Court in asserting civil liberties or
fundamental rights fail to be seen in their context. The advances in human rights
achieved in the Supreme Court can be assessed only against the background.
Occasionally, that background is so oppressive, so prejudiced and so cruel that one is
left wondering how a society conceived with such nobility of rhetoric and purpos
could have created such oppression, inequality and prejudice. That is an historical
matter. But a lawyer who tried to form a picture of American society by reading
nothing but the reports of cases in the Supreme Court would end up with a depressing
view of that society.
In studying even recent liberal decisions of the Supreme Court one tends to break off
from applauding the answers in sheer dismay that it was still necessary to ask the
questions. Sometimes even the answers cause equal dismay. The Supreme Court has,
for the past three decades or so, advanced the cause of human rights against the
opposition not just of those opposed to such rights but also of those who believed that
the unelected judges have no warrant in the constitution for such judicial activism.
But even on the human rights front if we go back beyond the 19505 we find a history
of the court’s reluctance to use the same Bill of Rights for the same purpose. As
Justice Thurgood Marshall, the first black to sit on the bench of the Supreme Court,
said in a case in 1978: ‘During most of the past 200 years, the constitution as
interpreted by this court did not prohibit the most ingenious and pervasive forms of
discrimination against the Negro.’
I do not seek to deny that recently much has been achieved both in civil rights and
elsewhere. But even the broad, unqualified statements of rights which the Supreme
Court Justices have had to apply did not prevent them, until recently, from taking a
narrow, legalistic, laissez-faire perspective on freedom so as to strike down as
unconstitutional legislation designed to stop the exploitation of workers, women,
children or immigrants. They legalised slavery; and when it was abolished, they
legalised racial segregation. They repeatedly held that women were not entitled to
equality with men. They approved the unconstitutional removal by the Executive of
the constitutional rights of Americans of Japanese origin after the bombing of Pearl
Harbor.
In truth, statements of fundamental rights can seldom be enacted with precision. They
are full of notions like ‘due process’ or ‘respect for family life’ or freedom to manifest
one’s religion’. And the rights are then qualified by equally elastic concepts, like
‘reasonable’, or ‘necessary in a free society’ or ‘national security’. When rights are

7

created in vague and imprecise terms, their content to be discovered by judges whose
choices are not determined by familiar and well understood rules of law, no one really
knows, till the courts have decided, what his rights are.
So, unless it can be shown that it is, on balance, necessary to enact a Bill of Rights to
enable our citizens to achieve rights not available through the processes of
democracy, unless it can be shown that we can agree on the content, and the precise
expression, of particular rights, we should be slow to confer upon our judges an
unreviewable power to evolve a miscellany of actual rights and restraints whose real
content we cannot sensibly predict.
However inconvenient and untidy it is for our judges to have to stand aside and
observe European judges, whether in Luxembourg or in Strasbourg, decide human
rights and discrimination questions on the basis of materials not available to the
domestic courts, that is not an argument for creating the great cloud of uncertainty
that a domestic Bill of Rights would bring.

8

