REITH LECTURES 1986: Law, Justice and Democracy
Lord McCluskey
Lecture 3: Hard Cases and Bad Law
TRANSMISSION: 19 November 1986 – Radio 4

In deciding the cases that come before them, judges can and do make law, and
Parliament is free to accept that judge-made law or to alter it. If Parliament chooses to
legislate, then there can, at least in theory, be no conflict between the law made by
Parliament and the law applied in the courts. And if anyone wants to assert that the
law made by Parliament is of an inferior metal, then the one audience that will not
listen to that argument is the judiciary.
But if we are to consider allowing the validity of laws enacted by Parliament to be
challenged in the courts on the ground of supposed conflict with some fundamental or
supreme law; if we are to think of allowing the judges’ solutions, based upon their
interpretation of an entrenched charter of fundamental law, to prevail over those of
Parliament, then perhaps we ought first to give some thought to the character of law
made by judges. I shall look at one field of law in which the courts were immensely
creative and in which the judge-made law inevitably affected the lives of millions
who had no part in the making of that law, little knowledge of its content, and no
freedom to contract out of it: the field of law governing the rights of injured persons
to recover damages in respect of accidental injury. Unlike many other areas of the
law, such as those concerned with commercial contracts or wills, it was not
practicable for most of the people affected by the law to study the judge-made rules
with a view to modifying their behaviour so as to fit it within the rules.
The fundamental notion that judges developed to govern the making of reparation for
accidental injury was the notion of wrong, of some fault, some blameworthiness on
the part of an identified wrongdoer who could be made subject to the effective
jurisdiction of the court and so be made to pay any damages found due. This is an
individualistic and moralistic notion. It means that injury itself gives no right to
compensation: the person who has done the injury must be identified and sued. The
wrongdoer must be arraigned before the court, not to be punished but to be ordered to
compensate in money. The victim must obtain evidence to establish that the alleged
wrongdoer has been guilty of a wrongful act which caused the injury. It is not enough
that another’s act has caused your injury. It has to be shown that that act was in breach
of some duty that the law recognised as apt to create rights and obligations. Because
there had to be proof by acceptable evidence of all the essentials, the victim had to
have the economic capacity, and the will, to gather the evidence, to finance the
litigation, to endure, if necessary, the extra legal sanctions that the alleged wrongdoer
was free to deploy—such as the threat of dismissal from employment—as well as the
capacity to wait, perhaps for years, for the case to be concluded. There was inevitably
the risk of failure, but even an apparent success could sometimes be rendered hollow
by the deduction of legal expenses incurred on the road to that success.

1

And there were other formidable obstacles. Contributory negligence, the judges
decided, was a complete bar to success: and the employer was not held responsible
when one employee negligently injured another; each employee was required to take
the risk of his fellow servant’s negligence, a judge-made doctrine which, though
gradually modified, left a considerable gap in the rights of employed persons. Other
claims were defeated by the development of the doctrine that certain people must be
deemed to have voluntarily accepted risks to which they were exposed. And, by
creating particular immunities, the judges erected other barriers to the recovery of
compensation. So the pursuit of compensation was a game of Snakes-and-Ladders, a
lottery in which the innocence or the hurt of the victim was no guarantee of success.
Some innocent victims recovered damages. Others did not. The chances of landing on
a snake were so feared that even those who were able to make a substantial claim
could seldom take the risk of a fight to the finish to obtain their whole rights. Most
cases were compromised on the principle that a bird in the hand was worth three in
the thicket. And even with its successes, limited though they were, the judge-made
law did little, if anything, to reduce the risk of injury. The courts could take no steps
to attack the causes of industrial injury: it would have been difficult for judges so to
develop their powers as to compel the introduction of safer working practices, to
secure the performance of duty rather than just a payment for its breach.
It would have been even more difficult for judges to develop a system whereby the
payment of compensation depended on the need of the injured person rather than
upon the responsibility of a wrongdoer; because litigation in the civil courts is
concerned with vindicating the rights of one citizen at the expense of another. If the
plaintiff wins damages it is because the defendant must pay them. The idea that a
plaintiff could win a right to compensation without somebody being held responsible
to pay it just did not make sense in a court of law. Judges could not create a fund to
enable compensation to be paid to those among the injured or bereaved who could not
pin the blame upon a solvent wrongdoer. In a court, the idea of no-fault compensation
was unthinkable. Judges could not reach out from the necessary limitations of the
system in order to confer rights to compensation based upon need.
The judges who, over a long period of time, made such law, and then applied it, were
certainly not operating in one of the law’s unimportant backwaters. It was an area in
which many people made their only contact with the law, and for many such people
that contact was all-important. if the law allowed no redress for being blinded or
crippled and gave no compensation, then they would look in vain elsewhere.
What are we to make of the body of law that the judges created? Though most people
would agree that incoherence, illogicality and irrationality would be serious defects in
the law, few would say that the law was good just because it was coherent, logical and
based on a clear principle. Judges will very properly aim for these qualities. But in
themselves, even when achieved, they do not make the law good. The law can be
considered good only if, being coherent, predictable and principled, it also produces
results which are socially acceptable. And the results of the judge-made law in the
field of reparation for personal injury left too much to be desired. For too many there
was, and is still, no remedy.
Tickets in a lottery

2

For those for whom the law could provide a remedy, the route to it was slow,
expensive, hazardous and uncertain. Even from the defendant’s point of view, the law
was unsatisfactory. The cost of litigation was high. Insuring against the risks of
litigation became very high. It has recently become clear—especially in America,
where generally the same legal principles apply—that the fear of being sued, and the
cost of insuring against that risk, have begun to make serious inroads into the
availability of vital public services, including medical treatment. When the law,
properly applied, produces the result that those who need medical treatment cannot
have it because doctors are afraid of being sued, then it produces a result which is not
socially acceptable.
If we end up, as we do, with a body of law which affords remedies which too often
have the appearance of tickets in a lottery, which threatens to inhibit the provision of
medical care or other necessary services and which hardly serves to raise standards of
care, then it is little wonder that some countries have decided to abandon the whole
judge-made edifice and introduce no-fault compensation.
It would be wrong to suggest that there was no rhyme or reason to it all; there was. It
was not necessarily the logic of the judges that was to blame; it was the major
premises that preceded the adjudication. And quite apart from the constitutional
inability of our courts to reach out and introduce positive measures designed to
achieve social justice, the very nature of litigation and of judicial training are such
that judges cannot calculate or control the long-term effects of the law, which they
build up painstakingly, one decision at a time. In the United States Supreme Court,
judges can, and do, select and assemble a whole spectrum of real cases to be
considered at the one time and can hear representations not just from the interested
parties but from others who are concerned about the consequences for the law of
whatever ruling is made. So the judges obtain briefings about the social and economic
results of formulating the law in a particular way before deciding what the policy of
the law is to be. But once judges do that, they have ceased to be judges as we know
them. They have become legislators making informed policy choices. I do not believe
that our judges can or should be given such tools, or such a role. It is not a role which,
by tradition, training or experience they are qualified to perform. When we ask judges
to decide the legal rights and wrongs of litigants we are doing something for which
there is no tenable alternative. Someone must resolve the disputes. It has to be judges.
And there is no escape from using, as judges, lawyers whose mental equipment
includes assumptions and prejudgments which lie outside the letter of the law.
Equally, we have to accept that as they decide one case after another, some of these
very assumptions and prejudgments become part of the law, as much, indeed, as if
they had been enacted by Parliament.
In a common-law tradition like ours, the judges have to fill the gaps and make law.
But let us be clear that that is what they are doing. let us understand that society, if it
does not review the provisional, the necessary, the imperfect law made by judges, is
abdicating the making of its policy choices to what Lord Devlin called ‘a body of
elderly men’. It is the proper function of governments and democratically elected
legislators to consider and make policy choices, not the proper function of judges.
That in itself is no startling or revolutionary proposition. On the contrary, it has been
accepted in modern times that an activist Parliament must intervene in order to

3

remake or restate the law which has been evolved by judges. And Parliament must
fulfil that role not just when the whole thrust of the judge-made law has produced
results which are notoriously seen to be no longer socially acceptable. It must do so at
all times to grapple with the classic problem of law in society; the difficulty, some
would say the impossibility, of writing down the law so that it is certain and its
application predictable, while at the same time ensuring that it prescribes and achieves
a fair and just result in individual cases. It is, for the most part, the courts, the judges,
that have to resolve the so-called ‘hard cases’, the cases in which the law points to a
result which appears to be unfair, or the cases in which different principles or rules of
law clash and compel a choice, a choice which determines the result. This problem
can, of course, arise whether the existing law has been enacted by Parliament or
created by judges. It will commonly arise if, when the law was laid down, the
particular problem was not foreseen, perhaps because it could not have been foreseen.
Thus, for example, the law which defined adultery and held it to be a matrimonial
offence, giving rise to certain rights in the innocent spouse, had settled down and
appeared to be comprehensively defined and understood, until science discovered a
way of impregnating a woman artificially with the semen of a man whom she had
never met. Until then the law was quite simple. If a man had lived completely apart
from his wife for a year and then discovered she was pregnant he could divorce her on
the ground of adultery; the law would hold the pregnancy to be sufficient evidence of
adultery, and there could be no answer. Then science provided an answer. The wife,
in a particular case, could say: ‘I haven’t committed adultery; I have been made
pregnant by artificial insemination.’ Today, she might go further and say: ‘I have
hired out my womb for a fee and am merely a host for someone else’s fertilised
ovum.’ So, for the first time, lawyers have to decide if physical intercourse is the
essential feature of adultery, or whether adultery is committed when a wife conceives
a child of which her husband is not the father.
A judge faced with such a question cannot sidestep it by saying: ‘This is an
unforeseen and unprovided-for situation; let Parliament deal with it.’ He has to
decide, and some new law is made. Obviously, most advances in technology are
capable of throwing up unforeseen problems for which the existing law does not
provide and the old law has to be stretched by judges to furnish answers which will
fill the gaps until Parliament attempts to fashion a legal structure to regulate the rights
and responsibilities of those affected by the new state of facts. But even without the
trigger of technological innovation, gradual changes in the perception of what is fair
and reasonable can suggest that the old law is inadequate, and cause judges to nurture
new principles and limit old ones in order to impose restrictions or make available
remedies that were not available before, This happened in relation to the concept of
cruelty in matrimonial cases, in which the judges gradually departed from the idea
that such cruelty had to be physical, and allowed divorce for mental cruelty. Likewise,
in the field of public order, the courts responded to unwelcomed forms of protest by
adapting the concept of breach of the peace. And the unfairness of the judge-made
doctrine of common employment led later judges to modify its excesses; though, until
Parliament intervened, the law remained unjust.
Elusive Definitions
The so-called ‘hard cases’ in which the justice of the case leads to one result, though
the existing law points to another, do not always produce bad law in the sense that the
particular results are unfair; but they tend to produce uncertain law. Law which is

4

uncertain is bad in principle, even if the results in particular cases can be justified.
When long-standing rules can be abandoned, when too many cases divide judicial
opinion and can be decided either way, then the warning signals should be out.
Yet despite the wisdom of the judges, despite their independence, despite their
impartiality, their traditions, their analytical skills, they disagree about what the law is
or should be. Such disagreement is unlikely to flow from overt political preferences. It
flows from the fact that where there is uncertainty, there is bound to be disagreement.
Unanimity is a rare phenomenon when there is room for doubt. And the law, even
today, contains a surprisingly large number of grey areas.
That is true even in the criminal law: the recent report of the Fraud Trials Committee,
sitting under the chairmanship of Lord Roskill, illustrates that even an apparently
simple concept like dishonesty is one that the law and judges, at least in England,
cannot readily explain to juries. And a recent well-known case demonstrates a similar
phenomenon. The case is Regina v Hancock & Another, the case of the two striking
Welsh miners who killed a taxi driver by dropping concrete on his taxi as he drove
another miner to work. The facts were simple enough, but the critical question was
whether the two miners had acted with what the law would recognise as murderous
intent. That looks like a question of fact. But the trial judge explained the law about
intent in such terms that after some five hours the jury sent a note to the judge
indicating that they were perplexed. So the judge gave them further directions in law.
If they were puzzled the first time, the second direction would not have helped them,
because the trial judge just repeated to the jury what he had said the first time. That is
hardly surprising, because he was being extremely careful to give the jury exactly the
directions which had been prescribed by the House of Lords itself only a short time
before in the case of Maloney. The jury brought in a verdict of murder against the two
miners. On appeal, the Court of Appeal quashed the conviction for murder and
substituted a verdict of manslaughter. They did so on the ground that what the trial
judge had said was potentially misleading: in other words that the House of Lords had
got it wrong in the earlier (Maloney) case.
So the Crown appealed to the Lords, who had then to decide if the guidelines they had
laid down in Maloney’s case were sound or defective. They agreed that the guidelines
laid down in Maloney’s case were defective, but they disagreed with the Court of
Appeal’s suggestions as to what the guidelines ought to be in future cases. Exactly
where that leaves the trial judge in future cases has yet to be seen. But it must be a
matter for some dismay that in 1985 and 1986 the judges in the highest courts were
still at sixes and sevens as to the appropriate formulation of the guidance to be given
to juries on a matter as basic, as common and as elementary as intent in a murder
case. There is something wrong when, after considering hundreds of criminal cases
involving intent, we still cannot produce an agreed and universally accepted statement
of precisely what the law requires for proof of specific intent.
No one can criticise the jury in the Hancock case. There is a tendency, which is by no
means new, to claim that juries cannot be trusted to handle complex criminal cases.
But if the Hancock saga is evidence of anything, it is that the problem is not in the
jury but in the remarkable difficulty that judges have in determining and explaining
the legal principles and rules which juries have to apply.

5

The Lamp of Freedom
The inevitable result of reducing the role of the jury would be to increase the role of
the judge. So it is worth glancing at the other half of that remarkable forensic
partnership.
The jury is not one unvarying institution, possessing the same character and powers
wherever it is found. Juries vary in size from six to 15 members. They decide civil
and criminal cases. Sometimes they have to be unanimous. Sometimes they are
allowed to deliver a verdict by a simple or a qualified majority. They mostly resolve
issues of fact, but sometimes must decide mixed questions of fact and law. In some
jurisdictions they may have a role in the sentencing process, as well as in determining
guilt or innocence. And the nature of the right to a jury trial in a criminal case varies
in different countries. I have no wish to provide an index to all varieties of the jury. It
would be substantial. I merely want to caution against the insular notion that the jury
is an institution as unvarying in time and character as the Rock of Ages. It is not, even
when it is embedded, as in America, in a constitution. It is a tool with many different
uses and dimensions.
The use of juries has had a profound effect upon court procedures and rules of
evidence. Juries came to cases totally ignorant of the background; some jurors could
not read. So the trial took the form of an oral presentation of the facts, with both sides
having carefully defined rights to present and to challenge evidence before an openminded court. Neither judge nor jury had an inquisitorial role. The rules of evidence
were fashioned to ensure that juries heard nothing that might prejudice their
consideration of the narrow issues they had to resolve, and the jury sat mute until it
pronounced the winners and the losers.
Learned commentators, here and in America, compared the form of litigation
resulting from the use of juries to a sporting contest, a boxing match, a fox-hunt. Lord
Devlin expressed the more traditional view in describing the criminal jury system as
‘the lamp of freedom ... the beacon that seven centuries have tended’. Lord Denning
said it was ‘the best guarantee of our freedoms’. I agree with that. But it is best to see
the jury as it is: an imperfect instrument in an imperfect world, an instrument
fashioned by history, rather than by any very conscious design, an instrument that
takes on a local colour in different jurisdictions.
So what are we to make of Lord Devlin’s assertion that if there were a tyrant in
Whitehall his first object would be to make Parliament utterly subservient to his will,
and the next to overthrow or diminish trial by jury? Since he spoke, the Diplock
courts have replaced jury trials in Northern Ireland in relation to offences from
murder downwards, and, after public calls by some judges, the Fraud Trials
Committee, under the chairmanship of Lord Roskill, has proposed that for certain
fraud cases trial by tribunal should replace trial by jury. These and other changes
certainly diminish trial by jury. So are there tyrants in Whitehall? I hope not. I think it
is going too far to suggest that simply altering the jury system is necessarily a giant
leap towards tyranny. If it were, then Scotland—where there is no automatic right to a
jury trial in most cases, and where juries can return a verdict by a simple majority—
must have been in the grip of tyrants for centuries.

6

Too many lawyers take a patronising view of juries. For myself, I have prosecuted
and defended in complex fraud, corruption and other such trials in Scotland, with
jurors selected from the voters’ roll, with some of the jurors almost as young as the
accused in the dock and some almost as old as the judge on the bench, without ever
feeling that the jury failed to understand by the end what the point was. We should not
patronise jurors by regarding them as too young, too old, too immature or too stupid
to understand how an accused person has brought about some definite practical result
by false pretences. If it really were true that jurors could not, after hearing the
evidence, understand the types of fraud case listed in the Roskill report, then they
really have no business to be deciding about murder, rape and arson. If there is
something wrong with the way in which those who perpetrate frauds are brought to
justice, or are not brought to justice, then the probability is that those who investigate
such frauds are not up to the task and those who present the cases to the jury are
unable to see the wood for the trees.
I am not persuaded that the system for establishing the guilt or innocence of those
charged with complex fraud or any other serious crime has broken down. And if it is
showing signs of stress then I consider that those who lay the blame on the jury are
firing at the wrong target. If we are to trim the wick of the lamp of freedom, let us do
it on the basis of evidence that it is necessary, not just because some people suppose
that judges could make a better job of determining guilt or innocence than a large
body of properly instructed citizens sitting as jurors. What has to be done is to
simplify the law, to improve the facilities for juries, to humanise court rituals and
modernise rules of evidence, and to devise ways to ensure that the cases are presented
to juries in a manner that is worthy of the high intellectual competence and substantial
remuneration of the lawyers, including judges, who take part in such trials.
Of course juries sometimes acquit people who probably have committed the crimes
with which they have been charged. But the principal reason for that is that under our
law no person can be convicted of a crime unless his guilt is established beyond
reasonable doubt, upon the basis of admissible evidence. I would not for one moment
suggest that we should tamper with the burden or the standard of proof. I ask merely
that we acknowledge that it is that standard, and not the gullibility of jurors, that
secures acquittals in most of those cases in which the prosecution fails. If it happens
too often that the guilty go free, let us rather re-examine the rules and procedures, to
see if in a civilised society we can properly provide the jury with more pieces of the
jigsaw of truth.
I am not sure if the current criticisms of the criminal jury system and how it is seen to
operate spring from the same attitudes that cause some lawyers to wax lyrical about
the new activism of judges in judicial review and urge the dramatic change in the
scope and character of judicial review that enacting a Bill of Rights would effect.
Certainly, diminishing the role of the jury while enlarging that of the judge would
achieve a significant shift of power in the whole field of public order. And obviously,
to diminish the system of trial by jury and at the same time to enact a Bill of Rights is
to engage judges in highly visible activities, all related to law, order, justice and
freedom.
What I question is the true relevance of such changes to the real problems of order
and justice. To enact a Bill of Rights in noble language and to set judges to apply it to

7

cases would, I suspect, be the modern equivalent of writing and producing a morality
play. It would be entertaining, even instructive, and would allow us to applaud the
occasional triumph of those values that the scriptwriters favoured. But it would have
little effect on how people behaved in the real world.

8

