REITH LECTURES 1986: Law, Justice and Democracy
Lord McCluskey
Lecture 4: Trusting the Judges
TRANSMISSION: 26 November 1986 – Radio 4

In the law, avoidable uncertainty is an evil and unfettered judicial freedom of choice a
vice. Consider, for example, how the law applies to industrial relations. The law must
apply in some shape or form, because the law cannot be absent from this, or, indeed,
from any other area of social activity. Even if Parliament were to pass an Act saying,
‘All laws applying to trade unions are thereby repealed’, that itself would be creating
a complex legal status for trade unions: a status which, with its privileges and
immunities, the courts would have to take account of if anyone raised an action
against a body which claimed to be a trade union. Indeed for the purposes of its
application. Even though the existing law or the ordinary law could be disapplied, the
result would be to create by law a particular set of rights and immunities for any body
successfully claiming to be a trade union. So it is axiomatic that some law has to
apply in the field of industrial relations, whether it is intrusive and regulatory or
restrained and permissive.
Is it not plain that the law that does apply, whatever it may say, should be precise in
its statement, certain in its effect and therefore predictable in its consequences?
Neither those in industry, nor their customers, nor the public at large can afford to
wait for years or even months while the legal aspects of industrial disputes are
debated through the courts at the stately pace of the Jarndyce litigation in Dickens’s
Bleak House — but with the predictability of the Grand National. Nor, indeed, can
society readily accept a situation in which, because the answers are uncertain, the
courts have to pronounce what are said to be temporary orders but which, because of
the nature of the matter involved and the law’s delays, in effect determine decisively
the legal rights of the parties.
In the law, as in much of the rest of life, we make people abide by the rules. But that
is tolerable only if people can readily discover what the rules are and what they mean.
The law is fair only if it is precise. That is why, at the price of inelegant complexity,
our Acts of Parliament endeavour to spell out with mathematical precision what the
rules are.
From the judges’ point of view, uncertainty creates another danger. If the application
of the law be left uncertain, if policy choices have to be made, if there are respectable
legal routes leading in opposite directions, then the judges (who have to choose one
route or the other) will inevitably, and correctly, be accused of making choices upon
grounds other than purely legal ones. And the courts will be dragged into politics. It
has happened before. Everyone agreed that judges should stay out of politics, even if
people don’t try to spell out the reasons for that very clearly. I suppose they must
include the fact that judges, by reason of age, sex and background, might find it
difficult to appear impartial and could never hope to be representative or accountable.
But I need not discuss this because the principle is not in dispute. From a strictly

1

judicial viewpoint, it matters relatively little what the law provides; what matters is
that it be clear and unambiguous.
That is true not just of industrial relations but of religious and moral questions, like
abortion, contraception and the right to die; and socio-political questions, like positive
discrimination or the balance between civil rights and the investigative powers of the
police. It is inevitable that the courts will be called upon to adjudicate in cases in
which such matters are in dispute, because access to the courts is a fundamental
feature of the rule of law. But the method of adjudication ought, as far as possible, to
be the relatively mechanical process of applying a precise set of unambiguous rules to
the facts, not a wide- ranging philosophical exercise in making policy choices.
The greater the latitude allowed to judges, the greater is the risk of their appearing
arbitrary, capricious and biased. In the ‘hard’ cases—those in which, because the law
is ambiguous or silent, judges frequently disagree both as to the law and the result—
the choice of result, the formulation of the law is in truth a policy choice. Sometimes
the judge will consciously make, and declare that he is making, a policy choice.
Sometimes the judge will present it as a legal choice, compelled inexorably by the
application of sound principles and authoritative precedents; he will emerge from the
delivery-room declaring that the newborn rule is legitimate but claiming that he is
merely a midwife, not the parent. But, in one sense, it hardly matters who claims
paternity for the new law. For it has become an independent entity with a life of its
own. It is the law. And it will remain the law until somebody alters it.
Changing the Law
If a higher court cannot or will not alter it, it can be altered only by Parliament. If
Parliament thinks about the rightness and wisdom of that piece of law, it is not bound
or shackled by inherited legal principle or precedent. Parliament avowedly looks at
the policy choice and asks: should the law remain in the state fashioned by the judges
or should it be changed? And Parliament, if it is doing its job properly, examines the
social and economic justifications for altering the law or leaving it as it is. Lord
Denning, when delivering the 1980 Richard Dimbleby lecture, exhorted us to trust the
judges. Well, of course we can trust the judges. We can trust them not to fiddle the
results. We can trust them to apply the law honestly to the case. We can trust them
from time to time to discover and enunciate new or revised rules of law. We can trust
them to make the difficult choices. We can even trust them—if only because there is
no alternative—to make interim policy choices about what the law should be, if such
choices have not already been made by the legislature. But there is no sound reason
for trusting judges to make final policy choices. Final policy choices fall to be made
by society as a whole, not by lawyers, however distinguished and upright they may
be.
So if judges choose that contributory negligence or common employment is to be a
complete bar to recovering damages for personal injury, society does not have to
accept that as a final, unreviewable choice written on tablets of stone. Society can say
(as it did on both these points), thank you, but if that is the law, the law is an ass.
Society can and should choose to reject judge-made law when its social results are
unacceptable. Trust the judges to plant the tree and till the soil. But if the fruit be sour,
graft on a new strain or chop down the tree. And that is exactly what, as a society, we
have always retained an unfettered right to do when judge-made solutions were or

2

became unacceptable or seemed to produce injustice. The point about the
development of the law in our society is that the lawgivers, whether they are judges or
legislators, create general rules intended to yield acceptable results in all foreseeable
cases. Then life throws up unforeseen cases, and either they or changes in society’s
perceptions show that the rules are inadequate. So they are changed. The courts are
the laboratory in which the rules are tested against reality and proved for social
justice. We can trust the judges to do that.
But we should not trust them to write and to rewrite the rules; because the judicial
system has a powerful constitutional inertia which resists change, because judges
baulk at changing the settled law, because judges cannot reach out and create whole
new systems of law, because courts are not equipped to assess the social merits of law
reform and because judges are not the right people to make the necessary valuejudgments. So, to face up to Lord Denning’s invitation to trust the judges: the correct
riposte is, trust them to do what? If the invitation is to trust them to make enduring
policy changes, I suggest we don’t. The cobbler should stick to his last. The judge
should be confined to resolving disputes by applying the law. Lawmaking should be
left to lawmakers, policymaking to responsible policy-makers.
And that’s just the problem with a constitutional Bill of Rights. It is inevitably a
charter of enduring super-rights, rights written in delphic words but in indelible ink on
an opaque surface. It turns judges into legislators and gives them a finality which our
whole tradition has hitherto professed to withhold from them. It makes the mistake of
dressing up policy choices as if they were legal choices. It asks those whose job it is
to know and apply the law to create and reform the law. It requires those whose skill it
is to know what the law is to decide what it should be. If the legislature shirks the task
of deciding what the law should be, either by avoiding the issue altogether, as it
sometimes does, or by addressing the issue but refusing to make the essential detailed
policy choices, the judges are compelled to step into the breach. Judges abhor a legal
vacuum. So if legislators or constitution-makers pronounce resoundingly that ‘All
men are equal’ but fail to indicate whether ‘men’ includes or excludes women, slaves,
blacks, aliens or unborn foetuses or corporate persons, then judges have to decide.
The decision cannot be made on the basis of the words alone: words, as Humpty
Dumpty reminded us, mean whatever we say they mean. If legislators don’t tell us
precisely what the words mean, then the words will mean what the judges say they
mean.
The words which were put into the Constitution of the United States and into the Bill
of Rights which became part of the Constitution, left many vital questions
unanswered. Precisely why some questions were left unanswered is an historical
matter. But no doubt some were avoided because there was no political consensus as
to what the answers should be. Others were not thought about because in the
prevailing social climate the questions did not arise. Others were unforeseeable
because the technological advances which later posed the questions had not yet
occurred. The 18th-century Americans, although they provided mechanisms for
constitutional amendment, did not make it clear exactly how the unresolved questions
were to be answered in the absence of any such amendment; but within 20 years, the
judges, under the leadership of Chief Justice Marshall, were claiming—and were
eventually accorded—the responsibility for providing the answers, upon the theory
that they were somehow bringing to light answers that lay beneath the written word.

3

A Dignified Cauldron
In the result, the Supreme Court of the United States became and has remained a
dignified cauldron in which the essentially political questions of race, civil liberties,
economic regulation, abortion, contraception, freedom of speech, pornography,
capital punishment and the powers of the President have been debated by lawyers and
decided by lawyers. Alexis de Tocqueville’s observation, 150 years ago, that ‘scarcely
any political question arises in the United States that is not resolved, sooner or later,
into a judicial question’, could be echoed by Daniel Boorstin in 1955. ‘The Supreme
Court,’ he wrote, ‘has become the American political conscience, a kind of secular
papacy, a new search in every generation for what the more large-minded and more
foresighted of the Founders might have meant if they were alive. All the crises in our
political history have sooner or later been stated in legal terms.’
Those who interpret a constitution cannot avoid choosing among competing social
and political visions. The walls between the political and judicial systems become
paper-thin. Just think about the kind of political and social questions that American
judges have been asked to resolve. They have to decide if telephones could lawfully
be tapped, if the mentally subnormal could be compulsorily sterilised, if minimumwage laws could be enacted, if blacks and whites could intermarry, if capital
punishment were permitted by the Constitution, if married couples could lawfully use
contraceptive devices, if the President was subject to the law, if abortion was
prohibited by the Constitution, how electoral boundaries should be drawn, whether
schoolchildren had to salute the American flag, whether the races should be
segregated on trains and in schools, whether women could be barred from practising
the law, what powers the police could exercise in investigating crime.
Let us look in just a little more detail at two cases concerning police powers. The first
is the case of Miranda. Ernesto Miranda was arrested at his home and taken to a
Phoenix police station, where he was accused of kidnapping and rape. After being
identified by the complaining witness, he was questioned by two policemen in a
secluded room for two hours. He was not told of his right not to be compelled to
incriminate himself. At the end of the interrogation, he signed a typewritten
confession prepared by the police. On that evidence he was convicted. The question
before the Supreme Court of the United States was whether the obtaining of a selfincriminating confession by such methods violated Mr Miranda’s constitutional
rights; and, if so, whether the evidence of the confession should have been allowed to
be heard at the trial. In considering how to apply the Constitution to the case, the
justices looked at their legal history in such matters. By the end of the 18th century,
the American colonists had a profound and sharpened awareness of the injustices
perpetrated in the English state trials and in Continental Europe by odious and cruel
methods of interrogating accused or suspected persons to force confession from them.
So deeply did the iniquities of the ancient systems impress themselves upon the minds
of those who enacted the American Bill of Rights that they made the rule against such
confessions not merely a rule of evidence, as in England or Scotland, but a part of
their fundamental law, ‘clothed with the impregnability of a constitutional enactment’.
They enacted the Fifth Amendment, which provides that no person shall be compelled
in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.

4

By 1966, when Ernesto Miranda’s case came before it, the Supreme Court had, in a
series of earlier cases, already rejected evidence improperly extracted by the police
use of so-called ‘third-degree’ methods, both physical and psychological. So when
Miranda’s case came before it, the court decided that persons who had been
interrogated in police premises, cut off from the outside world, not told of their right
to remain silent or told of their right to have a lawyer present, such persons had been
deprived of their constitutional rights; and that confessions obtained by such
interrogations should not be accepted as evidence by the courts. The courts, while
acknowledging that the legislators had the right to find ways to give those who were
detained by the police the protection which the Constitution accorded, prescribed
safeguardswhich had to be observed, and laid down concrete constitutional guidelines
for law- enforcement agencies and courts. Miranda’s conviction was quashed.
Let me look next at another civil liberties case, Mapp v. Ohio. On 23 May 1957, three
Cleveland police officers arrived at Miss Mapp’s house, looking for a person whom
they wished to question about a recent bombing. They apparently had information that
he was hiding in the house and that there might be hidden there a large amount of
what was described as ‘policy paraphernalia’. The police had no search-warrant, and
Miss Mapp, after taking legal advice, refused to admit them. Three hours later, several
policemen forced the door of the flat. Miss Mapp’s attorney had arrived by this time
but the police kept him out of the house and would not let him see his client, who,
incidentally, was not accused of any crime. She asked to see their search-warrant.
They didn’t have one. But one officer held up a piece of paper claiming it was a
warrant. Miss Mapp seized it and placed it in her bosom from where the officers
recovered it, after a struggle. They then overpowered and handcuffed the lady because
she had been, they said, ‘belligerent’ in resisting the recovery of the supposed
warrant. Next, they searched the entire premises. They found no bomber and no
policy paraphernalia, but they found some literature which they considered to be
obscene. They took possession of it without her consent, and she was charged on an
obscenity charge. The evidence against her on the obscenity charge was illegally
obtained in violation of Miss Mapp’s fundamental constitutional right: the right not to
be subjected to unreasonable searches. But the illegally obtained evidence was
allowed in at the trial and she was convicted on the obscenity charge and sentenced to
imprisonment. The Supreme Court, by five to four, decided that the evidence obtained
by the unconstitutional search was inadmissible, and the conviction was quashed.
It is of some interest to know that the Scottish courts, at least in 1957, and without
reference to any entrenched constitutional rights, would have arrived at the same
result as did the majority in the Supreme Court. The evidence would have been
excluded for the same basic reason, namely that the only practicable way the courts
can curb the abuse of power by the police is to exclude evidence improperly obtained
by such abuse. In other words, the courts will not sanction the use of grossly illegal
means by the police to discover or prove illegal activities by the citizens.
Now it is clear that rules that prevent the court from hearing evidence because of
disapproval of the way in which it has been obtained can result in the acquittal of the
guilty.
Society must strike a reasonable balance between excluding improperly obtained
evidence on the one hand, and acquitting guilty men on the other. The trouble with

5

doing it by excluding relevant and convincing evidence, on the basis that some kinds
of search amount to a violation of a constitutional right, means that society cannot
readily adjust on any principled basis the delicate balance between the interest of
society in safeguarding civil liberties and the interests of justice in convicting the
guilty. Yet situations may arise, for example in relation to the conduct of organised
crime or the trafficking in dangerous drugs, in which the balance has to be swiftly and
radically readjusted. So the Americans, in order to adjust the balance, have either to
amend the Constitution or to overrule or sidestep the decisions of the Supreme Court
in such cases as Miranda and Mapp. In the United Kingdom, by contrast, the general
rule can be altered by an Act of Parliament, or particular rules can be introduced for
particular cases.
In the United States, the exclusionary rule, as it is called (seen at work in the cases I
have described), has become the symbol of a wide- ranging battle in which different
interests argue about police powers and civil liberties, about law and order and about
the role of the courts. It necessarily becomes tied up with broader issues, such as the
responsibility and answerability of the judges, the intentions of the constitution
makers, the boundaries between states’ rights and federal rights, and the means which
society can adopt to fight any crime wave which is seen as likely to pose a serious
threat to that society. It is, of course, extremely important to strike a just balance
between the freedom of law- enforcement agencies to investigate crime effectively
and the necessary liberties of the subject. But this balance is not, I believe, a balance
that can be struck once and for all time, and for all cases. Indeed, there is no need for
it to be. Most citizens are willing to concede substantial restrictions upon their civil
liberties when they see their society threatened by some great and imminent danger,
for example in time of war, or when terrorists are perpetrating outrages, or if the
country is facing a great and growing problem of hard-drug abuse or organised crime.
For it is not only in wartime that the community might think it necessary to resort to
measures to protect itself against a frightening threat; only to find that such measures
may be prohibited by its written constitution. The threat posed by the circulation of
hard drugs is one that might call for measures such as mandatory testing which would
be inconsistent with traditional constitutional safeguards as interpreted by the courts
in quite different situations. The rapid spread of AIDS is another. It has been
described in one American court, with some exaggeration, as the modern-day
equivalent of leprosy. In different parts of the United States, regulations have been
made empowering health officials to close bathhouses and massage parlours used by
homosexual men; other regulations deny certain jobs to AIDS patients or bar children
with AIDS from schools. Some proposals have been made to put AIDS patients in
quarantine, or to make blood-testing compulsory, to discriminate against AIDS
patients in housing and medical treatment. Similar proposals have been made here.
Such measures are already being challenged in American courts because they
interfere with the rights of citizens who are innocent members of a class of persons
afflicted by a disease for which they bear no responsibility.
But if the elected legislatures and public health authorities conclude, on the basis of
evidence, that such measures are necessary to limit the spread of this new and
frightening disease to others, should their judgment be subject to veto by a court of
law on the basis that the measures proposed infringe rights conferred by a 200-yearold Bill of Rights? It is not an easy question to answer; but I suspect the public would

6

prefer that such decisions be taken by elected bodies which are answerable directly to
the public, not by courts, which are not.
Quite apart from special or sudden threats, most citizens concerned about the general
increase in reported crime would appear to consider it sensible to increase police
powers at the expense of certain of the citizens’ freedoms. And whatever reservations
one might have about particular proposals, the right way to do it is surely to allow the
law to be altered by Parliament to try to meet the present dangers, and to be free to do
so in the light of our contemporary perception of the contemporary problem, not
restricted by forms of words written at a different time in different circumstances and
interpreted by lawyers who cannot be called to account.
Neither system ensures a perfect balancing in all circumstances, but in this kind of
area, as in many others, flexibility, speed of response, and sensibility to what society
wants or will put up with, are benefits that are more readily obtainable without the
constraint of an entrenched body of constitutional law, enshrined in binding decisions
of the highest court in the land.
If the creation, development and reform of the law which governs the admissibility of
evidence in criminal trials, and in consequence regulates what the law-enforcement
agencies may or may not do, if this is left to judges, then the side-effects of their
lawmaking may prove to be serious and harmful. Obviously if the law so created,
developed and applied begins to produce results which, in practice, impede the
enforcement of the criminal law, then the judges, like most others, will want to see it
changed. But the only way that judges can change the law which they themselves
have created is to overrule their previous decisions or to find sophisticated ways of
sidestepping them.
Getting Round the Law
The principal way of avoiding being bound by a precedent without going the length of
overruling it, is to ‘distinguish’ it: to discover in the previous case some specialty,
often of fact, which enables the judges to say that it has laid down no general rule.
Judges are not always reticent about the exercise of this forensic skill. So we have
Lord Denning, while still Master of the Rolls, telling the Upper House of Parliament
about how the Court of Appeal sidestepped the civil law governing some aspects of
the law of contract. What he said was: ‘That was the law as laid down in 1934, and it
has remained so ever since. However, I shall tell your Lordships how we got round it.’
Adding; ‘We in the Court of Appeal have ways of getting round things’. Judges are
not always as frank. But once judges start getting round the law, not only do they
create uncertainty—which itself necessarily creates injustice—but they threaten to
undermine the whole traditional and constitutional basis of the authority of the
judiciary.
The basis of that authority is not the wisdom or sense of justice or the charisma of
particular judges. The true basis is that described by a great American judge, Learned
Hand: ‘His authority and immunity depend upon the assumption that he speaks with
the mouth of others, he must present his authority by cloaking himself in the majesty
of an overshadowing past.’ When judges start to get round the law—whether they
throw off disguises and do it openly, or pay mere lip service to the law that their
predecessors have laid down—they set a destructive example for all for whom the

7

established law has become an inconvenience. Few today would accuse British judges
of dissembling and using the words they have inherited to impose their own
subjective notions on contemporary society. But do we want to encourage or to drive
the judiciary into fashioning enduring rights and duties from the interplay of their
subjective notions of social justice and the words of some text that accords to them a
wide freedom of choice? I suggest we do not.

8

