REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 1: The Old Warhorse
TRANSMISSION: 18 November 1987 – Radio 4

The very mention of the symphony evokes the names of everyone’s favourite
composers: Mozart and Haydn, Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms, Tchaikovsky and
Mahler. All these men, in their different ways, found fulfilment for their ideas in the
symphony, and as a result it was for a long time the apex of classical music.
Orchestras are still known as symphony orchestras, and in America the place in which
they perform is often called simply, the ‘Symphony’.
Concert programmes used to be a balance of the familiar and the unfamiliar.
Standards of past achievement provided criteria for the judgment of contemporary
works. And until comparatively recently, the new could be presented in the context of
the old. As long as it lasted, this was a good arrangement. Every young composer
aspired to have a symphony performed. He wanted to create something new and
surpass his predecessors, and he could do this without running into any insuperable
difficulties.
Nowadays there’s a very large public who go to hear orchestras play the great
masterpieces of the past and, from time to time, they are prepared to accept a new
name. But one has an awful feeling that Shostakovich is going to be the last to break
into the standard repertoire. This might suggest that composers are not as gifted as
they once were. But I do not believe that is true: there is plenty of talent about, but the
talent does not happen to find the form and conduct of the symphony particularly
inspiring. Composers tend to regard it as a purely historical phenomenon which has
little to do with them.
Well, so what? If the composers do not want to have anything more to do with the
symphony, why do they not just go off and do their own thing and leave the audience
and the performers to get on with the existing repertoire? Many composers, in
particular the avant-garde, think just this: there is no real merit in defending a cultural
institution if in fact it ceases to be relevant to present-day concerns. The avant-garde
holds to a simple proposition. Composers should deal with the problems of
contemporary life, and struggle to move forward and express what has never been
expressed before. They should have the courage to get rid of the past, not only the dos
and don’ts of traditional pedagogy but even it’s performing apparatus, as for example
the orchestra, if it no longer answers their needs.
And as the composer ‘should’ do, so should the public (not to mention the
performers). Players and listeners ‘ought’ to appreciate contemporary composers and
make it their job to understand new works. For this, no doubt, they will be rewarded
in heaven. The public should stop patronising museum culture; concerts have become
nothing more than the repetition of the music of the past: music lovers should live in
the present.

1

Composers and modern music buffs dislike the slightly hedonistic flavour of public
concerts as they now exist. They are impatient of the philistinism of the managers and
the narrow-mindedness of the audience. Few composers get more than an infrequent
hearing in such concerts. They lose interest in the whole institution, and look for
alternative frameworks in which their work can be more appropriately represented.
Many of the composers’ complaints are justified. There are real difficulties about
performing modem music in traditional concerts, and it is not just a matter of pounds
and pence. It’s costly to rehearse even a comparatively simple new composition. But
even when one is put on, the artistic results are not always happy. For although
orchestral players are tired of forever playing the same old music, they are not always
particularly eager to play new pieces either, and object to the way in which some
present- day composers write for their instruments. They don’t see the point of what
they are asked to do and cannot relate it to their own experience. Many players will
agree with composers that the performance of new music requires special skills and
conditions which are not best obtained within the framework of the symphony
concert.
Oddly enough, the composers’ views overlap with those of the taxman, not to mention
assorted sociologists and populists. If symphony concerts will not pay for themselves
anyway, there is little point in further additions to their costs. Better to encourage a
less elitist, more democratic image: better public relations, a hard sell and the build-up
of ‘personalities’ to bring in bigger audiences. Of course the best performers are those
who can ‘sell out’ a hall, and the recording industry requires ‘stars’ to sell records.
The music might as well remain the same. It is the change of performers that
introduces the excitement and the novelty. Taken to its logical extreme, there would
be no further need for composers. Many people, even musicians, I fear, would not
lose sleep over that.
All this might suggest that the symphony as a serious institution is on its last legs. Yet
for all that, it struggles on, lurching from crisis to crisis. There are more professional
performers than ever before and improvements in musical education have raised their
standards. All in all, it is unlikely that there has ever been more music-making, and
music-making of a higher quality than exists at the present time. It thrives, and
attempts to replace the symphony orchestra as the centre of this vast activity have not
as yet been successful. There is still nothing as rich or as evocative as the noise of an
orchestra. However much composers go on searching for new sound worlds—and
platforms—most have to acknowledge a secret hankering for the luxuriousness and
infinite variety of the orchestra, if only they could get their hands on one.
There is genuine affection for this old warhorse, despite impatience with the way it
functions. Trying to destroy it is a waste of effort. It cannot be done and there is no
evidence that if it were, the money would be put to better use. Culture is the repetition
of past practices, and there is no point in belittling these just because they have run
into economic difficulties or because they contradict new fashions. Present-day
sensibilities and new ideas have to modify traditions, and aesthetics have to be
rewritten in terms of the technology which now impinges on our lives. The problem is
to reconcile the old with the new, which is much harder to achieve than merely getting
rid of the old.

2

But the point of the symphony is its ability to reconcile different and even conflicting
ingredients. It entertains and it teaches. It shows old ideas in a new light, and absorbs
new ideas into an historical fabric. No alternative formula could be thought out to
match this richness and diversity.
In its origins in Italy and Germany during the 18th century, the symphony was made
up of forms found in secular music, such as dance and opera, and it is no accident that
it became popular as church music declined. Till then the ritual of the Christian
Church had determined the style and scope of music. The wide range of expression
and the embodiment of drama in sacred music made it more than accompaniment, so
that it survives even when separated from its original functions.
In the symphony, too, the forms needed to be strong enough to hold the listener’s
attention. For the first time in its history, music existed as musicians ideally wished it
to: to be contemplated in silence to the exclusion of all distraction. Even audience
participation, which in many cultures displays the listener’s knowledge of what is
going on, was limited to a ritual clap in its right place where it would not interfere
with the music. The concert became a secular ceremony. The newly converted and
soon to be purpose-built concert hall was an urban temple. People put on their Sunday
best to attend, and came with a solemnity appropriate to such festive proceedings.
Of course, it was not quite as high-minded as all that, and doubtless as many came to
be seen to be listening as actually were listening. It was the festival of the rising
middle classes, and was financed by their subscriptions rather than through the
patronage of the gentry or royalty.
Haydn defined the form of the symphony as we now know it. Writing for the
entertainment of the court of Count Esterházy, he had to make do with a mere handful
of players. But his symphonies, operas and chamber music, although intended
primarily for diversion at a social function, contained an unprecedented range of
musical imagery and depth of feeling that might actually have seemed inappropriate.
The public symphony concert then developed quickly, because there was a real
demand for it. The learning of instruments, singing and playing together, was a
common pursuit and the mark of fashion. The Vienna correspondent of the
Allgemeine Musikzeitung wrote in 1800: ‘There are probably few cities where musical
amateurism is as general as it is here. Everybody plays, everybody learns music.’ The
new symphonic composers also developed chamber music, intended for these
amateurs. Providing chamber music was one of the ways in which Haydn and his
contemporaries earned their living. It gave them an informed public which understood
what went on musically from personal experience; the essential condition for the
development of music right into the 19th century.
When there is unity between composer, performer and listener, each expresses
himself freely and fully. There is a continuity between private pursuit and public
event. One informs the other. Such conditions do not survive intact in any later
period.
Small wonder, then, that the classical style and its symphony is considered the ideal—
the ne plus ultra against which all other styles are measured. It is not an unreasonable

3

prejudice that people write the history of music as if it were developing towards the
perfection of the late 18th century, and in decline from it ever since. Nothing affected
the survival of the symphony as profoundly as the alterations in the correspondence of
private musical experience and public performance.
The scheme of Haydn’s symphony, with modifications, kept it the most important and
popular instrumental form of succeeding periods. The most significant change is
simply the amount of noise the orchestra could make. There may be a limit to what is
required in the drawing-room, but there is no doubt that the larger public likes a lot of
noise, and to this end composers developed the ideas of tutti and crescendo.
But loudness is only one element of a rhetoric intended to attract and hold the
attention of a public which was to be concentrating exclusively on the music. The
symphony had to contain within it enough variety and contrast to command the
listener’s attention and prevent his mind wandering. Haydn and Mozart managed this
by building out the conventions of the various types of movement in the symphony
with internal contrast of the parts, as in the gradual evolution of second and even third
subjects in the sonata, and an intensification of thematic working, variation,
development and enrichment of harmony by altering the middle parts. They
developed a mode of thought which, while not obscuring conventional divisions,
altered their proportions and rearranged their content to avoid predictability. Interest
was maintained by continuously renewed invention, requiring virtuosity of
compositional technique and the extensions of music’s expressive range. The
dramatis personae of the period come to life in the music. Soldier, cleric, peasant and
nobleman fight, march, love and die there. Nature is no longer an Arcadian backdrop,
but the dramatisation of their storms and passions.
This newly found romanticism is also reflected in the reintroduction of the noble and
now archaic manner of church polyphony into the symphony. This provided
solemnity, and was yet another way of raising emotional tension. At the time, the
juxtaposition of different genres of music, old and new, must have sounded
surprising.
The values of this golden period survive in the way music is taught to this day. Both
technique and repertoire are derived from the 18th century. Most teachers rightly
believe that if you can play Mozart, you can play anything; or, put the other way
round, nothing is harder to play than Mozart. But this classical teaching causes much
of the misunderstanding and frustration that exists about modern music. Composers
complain that performers are trained both technically and aesthetically in a derivative
style and tend to measure everything else against it. They believe that players should
be trained to do what they write. Players and teachers, and a lot of the audience,
simply brush aside the argument that they should take account of anything outside
classical music. They point out that the majority of today’s top soloists seem to be
perfectly happy studying and repeating classical masterpieces. Recent music does not
have much to do with music as they understand it. And the public clearly agrees with
them. There is a genuine conflict of interest here. We may groan about this, but we
should rejoice that classical pedagogy is still as influential as the gramophone record
in informing taste.
Dining with Mozart

4

In the 19th century, music belonged to the composer, who began to develop a more
public, even aggressive attitude. Previously, techniques provided expression within
modest forms, to give pleasure in cultivated and elegant manner. From Beethoven
onwards, a new rhetoric appears, comparable to religious or political exhortation.
Music, though no longer…serving religion, instead becomes a religion itself.
‘Whoever possesses Knowledge and Art has also Religion,’ remarks Goethe.
‘Whoever possesses neither of these, he has Religion.’ (This somewhat ambiguous
statement might imply that Knowledge and Art constitute an alternative religion.)
Similar feelings were expressed by Schumann, Berlioz, Brahms and Wagner. Music
exists to portray pure feeling. In Mozart, Wagner still hears the formal divisions as if
they were the courses of a gentleman’s dinner, ‘as if I heard the sounds of the serving
and clearing away of a banquet set to music’. But the human voice in Beethoven’s
Ninth Symphony introduces decision; ‘decision as can only be represented in human
language’. Schumann contrasts ‘real music’ with the desire merely to be entertained
through displays of virtuosity. He scorns a public bent only on pleasure. He describes
them as ‘the fine flower, the choice aristocracy of dilettantism” His imaginary
Davidsbund are committed to the highest art; they are believers who will fight for it.
Such exalted sentiments aspire to more than a ‘beautiful semblance’. In the telling
metaphor of Walter Benjamin, music becomes something which hits the listener ‘like
a bullet’; something of such force that it alters ‘the mode of his participation’. In the
19th century only Wagner, for whom instrumental music had already ceased to
contain the expressive potential he found in music drama, made a fundamental break
with the Viennese classics. For Schumann, Mozart and Haydn were the first of the
Romantics, and Brahms’ First Symphony is clearly meant to continue where
Beethoven left off…or so his quotation of the theme of the Ninth Symphony suggests.
But Schubert’s ideas led on to symphonic developments at the same time looser and
more expansive than the Viennese classics. His ‘Great’ C major, in Schumann’s
words, ‘leads us into a region where we cannot remember ever having been before,
and these heavenly lengths, like a great novel in four volumes by one such as Jean
Paul!’ In the same way, Adorno speaks of the forms of Mahler’s symphonies as like
those of the novel, comparing the ‘pedestrian quality of the musical material with the
sublimity of its representation, the relationship of form and content’ to that of
Flaubert’s Madame Bovary, ‘the novel of novels’.
The need to say more, at greater length and in a louder voice, is the expression of the
belief of the 19th-century artist who ‘recognises as (his} first commandment that the
will of the poet can tolerate no law above itself. This is a form of self-aggrandisement.
The Romantic composer asserts his authority over all others— performers, patrons
and listeners alike— bending them to his will in a way unimagined by Haydn or even
Beethoven. His ambition is ‘the achievement of “immediacy”, of forms of expression
directly understandable without convention and without previous knowledge of a
tradition’.
If the 19th century belonged to the composer, the 20th century belongs to the
conductor. The new enlarged orchestras and expanded forms required by Wagner and
his successors could not be managed with nothing more than one player starting and
stopping the others and marking the cadence points. The ways of chamber music
could no longer apply. A new silent performer, the conductor, had to be invented and
if he was not himself the composer, stood between composer, orchestra and audience.

5

Even earlier, the lack of a conductor had been apparent. Mozart is full of complaints
about poor performances and ensembles. ‘These coarse, slovenly, dissolute court
musicians’ are one of the chief reasons why he detested Salzburg. ‘If only they were
organised...’ The Berlin orchestras ‘are not sufficiently careful in observing the fortes
and pianos’
The arrival of the conductor was seen as the way ‘to abolish disorder’, to ‘place one
man at the head of everything, one who is not concerned with any particular part, one
who can give his undivided attention to the whole, one who only beats time, not by
hammering on the music desk, but only by means of visible signs’. But a player in
Spohr’s orchestra in Cassel writes in the 1830s, ‘The cursed little white stick always
did annoy me, and when I see it domineering over the whole orchestra, music departs
from me... When everything goes of its own accord (with the maestro sitting quietly at
the cembalo), I am in quite another world, far away from this barbarous present time
stripped of all sweetness and dignity.’
The public observed Mendelssohn, Mahler, Richter, von Bülow, Wagner, Strauss and
Toscanini on the podium. It helped them focus their attention and provided balletic
distractions, and for them these men became heroes and poets. They appeared to
interpret the music themselves, though in fact they were only causing the players to
do so. But the players throughout the centuries resented conductors, resented the
power they held over them and their own condition of servitude. The very fact of the
conductor and his inevitable and irritating physical presence disturbs the performer
and is one of the principal reasons for discontent among orchestral players. But no
attempt to get rid of him, as in the conductorless Persimfans, set up in the Soviet
Union after the Revolution, survived for long.
The greater efficiency of the conducted orchestra allowed composers to enlarge the
palette of available sounds by bringing together formerly unrelated colours. To
achieve this in practice required more training and rehearsal, which was not always
available. More than any other composer, Berlioz took advantage of the new
orchestra, and the scores of Wagner and Mahler could not have been conceived
without it. Having orchestras of the highest calibre at their disposal, composers could
realise subtle gradations of timbre and dynamics, complex doublings of instruments,
and dissolve instrumental choirs, the strings, wind and brass, into each other.
Orchestral colour could now be regarded as a separate ingredient, possibly more
important than all the others. In the classical age, expression was contained in
harmony, melody and rhythm; in the modern orchestra the ideal of music is
Klangfarbenmelodie (an endless melody of sound colours). For Haydn and Mozart,
orchestration, however subtle, is subservient to the harmony. In Wagner, Mahler,
Debussy and early Schoenberg, expression is directly located in the colour-melodies
of the orchestra.
There is now much less overlap between orchestral performance and chamber music,
and to realise these new sounds, the individual player’s part becomes fragmented. His
role is to contribute to a texture which, from where he sits, he cannot always perceive.
This makes him more like a highly skilled operative than a performer. Since he is
required to master new techniques and play what in itself does not necessarily make
musical sense, he has to have total control over the colouring and gradation of his
instrument, be able to listen to himself critically and to pick out and listen to other

6

players who may be sitting quite far away from him. Except when he has a selfcontained solo, he is not only a servant but completely dependent on the conductor, as
he can no longer assess the rightness or wrongness of a great deal of what he is
required to do.
The music that comes after Wagner requires a new type of specialised listener. His
experience of tone colour per se is of a subjective nature. It cannot be measured, nor
notated, nor has it a syntax of its own. It has no convention because it is free-flowing
expression. At best the score shows how it is to be achieved; but it cannot be
described or analysed. Classical symphonies could be learned from piano scores.
There are two-piano versions of Mahler, Debussy and Schoenberg, and vocal scores
of Wagner, Puccini and Strauss, of course, but they convey only a part of the music.
The listener who comes to music after Wagner gains little from a personal experience
of chamber music. In fact this kind of person is imbued with experience and attitudes
which actually stand in the way of his coming to terms with late 19th and 20th century
music. In his autobiography, Sir Karl Popper describes his family and himself as
typical Viennese, educated music lovers. ‘I was always conservative in the field of
music. I felt that Schubert was the last of the really great composers ...’ He turns with
the typical wrath of a cultivated Viennese amateur on the very notion of what he calls
progressivism in music. Grudgingly admitting the possibility of some kind of progress
in art (though, characteristically, not that which has actually taken place) he sees
music composed by Wagner and Schoenberg as merely self-indulgent, leading to
‘self-centred attitudes and megalomania’. ‘Of course I do not blame an artist or a
musician for trying to say something new. What I really blame many of the “modern”
musicians for is their failure to love great music...’ Nowadays a public, which is more
open to ‘modern’ music, lacks experience of chamber music. Conversely, more
traditionally cultivated musicians believe that modern music lacks the essential
qualities of music itself and so justify their failure to understand it aesthetically.
The present state of the symphony can be compared to what it once was, but this does
not mean that every comparison with the glory that was once Vienna has to be
unfavourable. And the symphony concert, while retaining much of its original
character, is today only one of several alternative forms of public music making. If the
means of support exist, there is no good reason why different kinds of music:
modern, classic, ethnic, community, improvisatory, each in its own venue, should not
go on at the same time. It fits in with a democratic and pluralistic society. But
something gets lost. Great cultures of the past, however limited their availability and
practice, rest on a kind of contract, an agreement between artist and audience. A
pluralistic culture of mutually exclusive music to be picked up and dropped at will,
has a peculiarly weightless and arbitrary character to it. Pluralism is a condition of the
rich, and works to avoid confrontation and revolt— the engine of social and artistic
progress.
New music actually makes a point by shocking people, confronting them with things
they might not want to hear. It is a fine thing if people who come to hear Alfred
Brendel are taken by surprise, even if some of them are going to walk out. But this
cannot happen when every kind of music is separated and sheltered from a supposedly
wrong audience. Mutual tolerance is all very well but will not replace the exhilaration
of confrontation. It is dull! Specialisation may be efficient, but with it music is just

7

another amenity in an eventless world, untouched by the creative spirit. If
confrontation is avoided, the synthesis of irreconcilable practices is impossible. Risk
is replaced by the supposition that technical excellence is everything. I suspect that, if
compelled to choose, Mozart would have been prepared to dispense with ‘technical
excellence’.

8

