REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 5: Let the People Sing
TRANSMISSION: 16 December 1987 – Radio 4

To think of modern music in an age of eclecticism as no more than yet another style is
to miss its essential point. Modernism developed in the last century among artists
deliberately attacking conventionality. They were not slow to see that banality was a
symptom of a disease contracted by art and artists in bourgeois society. At the time
the disease had a name: it was called decoration. Art was banal and conventional as
soon as it served no higher purpose than to ornament or divert its audience, and it was
misunderstood and condemned whenever it aimed to be more than decorative. The
bourgeoisie found it ugly, grotesque and full of wilful distortions of their idealised
view of the world. As likely as not, modernists were incompetent, not prudently
masking their deficiencies but flouting them for all to see. Now, a hundred years later,
modernist painting, literature and the music which followed them are classics. As with
any significant art, the study of structural detail will help us to familiarise ourselves
with style, but does not necessarily reveal the prophetic achievement of modernism; it
forecasts future realities, rather than reflects society’s own image of itself.
The visionary dimension of modernist art goes hand in hand with a regret for the past.
At the beginning of civilisation, art was integrated into everyday life and it still is in
some places. Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring evokes a mythical past. Varèse’s apartment
in New York was a jumble of musical instruments of exotic origin. Even the second
Viennese School looked back longingly at the music of 18th-century Vienna. They
wanted to put music back at the centre and not out on the fringes of life.
Not that every artist who calls himself avant-garde shares the philosophy of
modernism. Avant-garde used to be a term of abuse. Nowadays it is an indispensable
qualification for being taken seriously. It’s true that many characteristics of modern
music, dissonance, fragmentation, the absence of romantic melody and extreme
contrasts, have become stock-in-trade. Nobody any longer expects contemporary
music to be otherwise. But the presence of such hallmarks does not automatically
guarantee that a new piece is composed urgently and coherently or aspires to be
anything more than entertaining. Yesterday’s sighs, screams and groans can
degenerate into little more than gimmicks.
Perhaps that is a bit harsh. The best of present day composers, Boulez, Carter,
Messiaen and Ligeti, are as ambitious as their predecessors and do not write the way
they do automatically. But the particular set of conditions under which Stravinsky,
Schoenberg, Webern and Varèse worked no longer exist. Musical society no longer
imposes the demands on artists which turn of the century innovators had refused to
meet. Now there are no precise expectations. Composers are left with the slightly
melancholy feeling that they exist in a vacuum, disturbing nobody and needed by
nobody. As long as subsidies hold up, there is little reason why a limited fraternity of
composers should not pursue their harmless aims.

There is no point in looking for an overtly confrontational character in the more or
less isolated institutions of avant-garde music. Everybody in them is fully absorbed
with technical and organisational problems and little time remains for reflections upon
the role and nature of music. It is easy to mistake activity for progress. The avantgarde argues that it is exploring technical possibilities to bring the formal discoveries
of the great modernists to fruition. This is the proper concern of present- day music,
and harping on about specialisation and isolation of modern composers is beside the
point—just gnawing away at the same old bones. But there are composers who can
work in the mainstream, and between avant-garde and mainstream, there are yet other
composers who reject both, wanting to place community— community of composer,
performer and listener—above all else.
Glass: ‘Crazy, Creepy Music’
The latest of these are the American Minimalists, Terry Riley, Steve Reich and Philip
Glass. The deliberate simplicity of their musical means is pretty shocking, but they
capture a new, young audience that has not previously been attending concerts.
According to John Rockwell, the critic of the New York Times, ‘their music is prized
by its admirers for reuniting serious music with interested, emotionally committed
young audiences. It is damned by its enemies as so lacking in complexity and
emotional range that it can hardly be called serious at all’ Illustrating the Minimalist
style of discourse, Rockwell quotes Glass describing Boulez’s Domaine Musicale
concerts as ‘a wasteland, dominated by these maniacs, these creeps, who were trying
to make everybody write this crazy, creepy music’.
Minimalism is an anti avant-garde movement which attempts to raise fundamental
questions about the nature and social purpose of music in the present-day world. In a
purely local, American sense it is a reflection of a malaise among musicians,
especially on the West Coast, who fear that European music with all its educational
trappings has been imposed upon them and is irrelevant in their environment.
Geographically, California is as near the Balinese Gamelan as the Vienna
Philharmonic. The earliest Minimalist piece, Terry Riley’s In C surprised listeners by
the brutal humility of its style, at a time when modern music, if nothing else, was
expected to be very complicated and demanding of players and listeners alike. Riley
rejects the technical accretions of music. He is not primarily concerned that a
performer be a virtuoso or, for that matter, even competent. Musicians make music
with each other and the composer is only there to provide the framework. Riley’s
followers cite Indian, African and Indonesian music as cultures in which musicmaking is a communal activity, from which audience participation has not been
eliminated, as it has been in the West.
Philip Glass and Steve Reich’s music since 1966 is as yet the strongest contradiction
of the Boulez-Stockhausen school of the Fifties. Glass and Reich’s music has a sleek,
commercial air because, taking their cue from Pop music, they wrote exclusively for
their own groups of players, at least until recently, and used electronic amplification.
In creating their performing groups, they took both technical and social factors into
account. Theirs was to be an ‘ongoing music’, in Steve Reich’s phrase, ‘of people
singing and playing instruments.’ Reich at first considered it a matter of principle that
he should himself play in all his own music. ‘In 1963,’ he wrote, ‘I first decided that
despite my limitations as a performer I had to play in all my compositions. It seemed

clear that a healthy musical situation would only result when the functions of
composer and performer were united.’
Historically, the development of specialised performers, conductors and composers
led to increasing virtuosity. Modern music became obsessed with technical matters
and electronics, where the finest differentiations of detail were readily available. But
Reich wanted to do away with all that. He believes that ‘the pulse and the concept of
clear tonal centre will re-emerge as basic sources of new music’.
Inducing Spiritual Trances
F Stylistically Minimalist music is, built out of simple elements, though the way they
are put together is by no means simple. The harmonic idiom is very basic and there is
little note against note counter point Instead, systematic rhythmic counterpoint and the
use of what Reich calls ‘phasing’ to define form can hold the listener’s attention over
long stretches. Phasing means that a number of fragments of unequal length begin
together and are then regularly repeated against each other in such a way that they
increasingly diverge. After a certain number of permutations, the music returns to its
point of departure, and may then be repeated or replaced by a new phase. In its
origins, phasing is a simple structural device for extending musical material, which is
found in ethnic music, especially in African drumming. The music is intended to carry
the listener along and produce an exalted state of being within him, comparable to that
induced by drugs. The distance between listener and music is removed so that he
himself becomes a participant.
The idea that music may induce changes of consciousness is not entirely foreign to
European music, but has not been a major preoccupation. Possible connections or at
least parallels could be drawn between the Minimalists and Messiaen, Scryabin and
even Wagner; and Adorno’s hostile remark that Wagner was compelled to simplify
and regularise the classical music style in order to create the massive effect he
desired, can with some justice be made to stick on Glass and Reich.
Their popular success has brought them back’, some would say, and not altogether
approvingly, to the professional symphonic world. Both now write for orchestra, and
Glass has had success in the opera house. This weakens their position and puts them
into an impasse similar to Stockhausen and Cage when they attempt to impose their
notion of participation upon the professional orchestra. By returning to the symphonic
world, the Minimalists look like sacrificing the very beliefs about music which drew
attention to them in the first place.
The most important thing about Minimalism is its rejection of music for its own sake.
The goals lie outside the music itself. In this it resembles Carl Orif. Orif was writing
vocal works in the Thirties and Forties, in which he developed a simplistic and direct
style, and intended to convey the spiritual power of music and its place within the
community. He too was after a ‘world music’, in which non-Western elements were
combined with simplified harmony from earlier Western music. His style derives in
part from Stravinsky’s Les Noces, and it must have been from that ballet that he got
the idea of musical form based on the repetition of short and self-contained melodic
fragments. He developed an educational method, which has had a great influence on
classroom activities for younger children. He too moved into the theatre, wishing to
reintegrate word, dance and music.

Turning music into a fanciful version of primitive society carries unfortunate
associations. It seeks unanimity, while modern society fosters individuality.
Audiences today value virtuosity. Minimalists and primitivists remain true to their
beliefs only by denying the privilege of individuality, and completely submerging
themselves within community and disappearing from view. Their pretensions can
only be realised by an act of self-negation, one which would make music into nothing
more than an off-beat version of adult education. This obviously is taking things to
the absurd; in reality their music is judged according to existing aesthetic values and
not the ones they propose.
A Propaganda Vehicle
The musical ideologues of the Soviet Union, at least until the death of Stalin, also
wanted music to serve social ideals. Many artists welcomed the Russian Revolution,
in the mistaken belief that the new socialist state would require an art which would be
modernist in character. The new rulers briefly flirted with the idea that modernism
contained a social critique which corresponded to their own. After all, Baudelaire,
Wagner, Marx and Bakunin were all contemporaries. But the commissars were soon
persuaded to reject such alliances and instead concentrated support on traditional
musical forms, insisting they be made comprehensible to the newly enfranchised
public and used as a vehicle for social propaganda. They wanted to eliminate what
was called ‘bourgeois individualism’ or subjectivism. To serve the new society, artists
were to be reintegrated into it, learn from it and fulfil its demands. They were required
to stress the optimism of the society. At no time in the long history of art and its
patrons have artists received so much, if so much unwelcome, attention from their
rulers.
Composers were advised to steer clear of foreign avant-garde influences and to base
their works on solid positive models like Beethoven and Tchaikovsky. They were to
incorporate popular and folk music into their symphonies as Haydn, Mozart and
Beethoven had done, and always be clear, direct and straightforward. This is not the
worst advice for composers, and leaving aside Shostakovich, the symphonies of
Mayakovsky as well as those of Prokofiev are well worth a hearing. Perhaps the
optimism of their finales borders on the bombastic, but who can say that Beethoven
and Mahler do not sometimes share the same fault The Russian orchestras and
pedagogical system have been protected and remain among the best in the world. But
the fortunes of Socialist Realism have waned and the ideologues do not persuade their
composers; they merely get in their way, only delaying the emergence of the same
problems as exist in the West.
It is not surprising that musicians turn with revulsion from the crude and intolerant
way Soviet cultural functionaries treated composers and performers, nor that the
bureaucracy survives the ideology. But the problem of the relationship of creative
artist to community was not just thought up in Moscow; it has been of central concern
to artists, thinkers and teachers since Plato.
Social consciousness not only inspires a composer’s choice of texts or programmes,
but commits him to musical form as a way of achieving clarity and comprehensibility.
Aaron Copland exhorted the American radio networks to employ ‘regular staff
composers very much in the way Count Esterházy employed Haydn.’ Writing during

the Depression, Copland asked, ‘can we composers write a music that will be of
interest to these hitherto untouched millions of listeners, and if so, what manner of
music shall it be? One thing is certain: the new musical audiences will have to have
music that they can comprehend. That is axiomatic. It must therefore be simple and
direct. But there is no reason why it should not be a music that exploits all those new
devices discovered during the first years of the 20th century. Above all, it must be
fresh in feeling. In no sense must it be capable of being interpreted as a writing down
to the level of the public ... To write a music that is both simple and direct and is at
the same time great music is a goal worthy of the efforts of the best minds in music’.
Copland had little time for the complications of Schoenberg or Varèse, both of whom
were in the United States by then. But his views were more or less echoed by many
composers of the time—certainly Hindemith and most of the American pupils of
Nadia Boulanger—and they closely match those of Benjamin Britten. After the war,
in 1951, Britten wrote: ‘As an artist, I want to serve the community... In other days,
artists were the servants of institutions like the Church, or of private patrons. Today it
is the community that orders the artist about. And I do not think that is such a bad
thing, either.’
Such enthusiasm for the wearing of livery would have surprised Haydn or Mozart, as
their main ambition in life seems to have been to escape from the clutches of the
Church and their private patrons. But Britten could only have meant what he said as a
metaphor, and later modified his views. In his Aspen Award speech some years later
he said: ‘I take note of the human circumstances of music, of its environment and
conventions ... I believe, you see, in occasional music ... almost every piece I have
written has been with a certain occasion in mind, and usually for definite performers.’
He continued, ‘a musical experience needs three human beings at least. It requires a
composer, a performer and a listener, and unless these three take part together there is
no musical experience ... The experience will be the more intense and rewarding if the
circumstances correspond to what the composer intended. The further one departs
from these circumstances, the less true and more diluted is the experience likely to
be.’
Britten believed that the composer himself should decide the conditions under which
his work is performed. He is to incorporate his social environment into the
imaginative and technical composition of the work. Everything that has to do with the
performance is to be equal in inspiration to purely personal and structural aspects. For
Britten, this meant the place—Aldeburgh; the community—music lovers, amateur
choral singers and school children, many of them of limited performing ability, as
well as ‘friends who come together to make music’. Rostropovich and the lot were
much more than his geographical and human environment. They were chosen to be
part of the actual inspiration of Britten’s pieces.
As has so often been the case, progressive aspirations lead all too easily to autocratic
practices. I think I can tell you some of the things which any artist demands from any
society. He demands that his art should be accepted as an essential part of human
activity and human expression.’ All very self-confident. It is as if Britten were saying
that modern music could be set on course by a simple redefinition of aims and
practices. The way to do it was to set up a model community, rather like a William
Morris brotherhood, in which the functions of artists and craftsmen could be

reintegrated. Individual inspiration would be married to good craftsmanship.
Composers, performers and listeners would be bound together by mutual
understanding and common purpose.
Aesthetic islands in the English countryside smack of the middle class acting out
medieval fantasies. Artistically it might well have been a disaster. But it wasn’t.
Britten created some of his best works in Aldeburgh and his festivals provided the
opportunity to hear a range of interesting and often unfamiliar music in fine
performances. Possibly the setting sometimes limited the scope of his vision, but he
had the happy knack of turning practical problems to his own advantage. That is why
Noye’s Fludde and Let’s Make an Opera manage to avoid a specifically educational
flavour. Ideology did not squash musical inspiration, as it had so often done in the
Soviet Union and even in the Gebraucbsmusik (music for everyday use) of the
Twenties in Germany.
Given the differences between the England of the post-war period and the Weimar
Republic, Britten shared a lot of beliefs with Hindemith, Kurt Weill and Hanns Eisler.
They, too, were critical of the way modern music was developing, although in
Germany with its many opera houses and orchestras, the isolation of the composer
was by no means as dramatic a fact as it was in England. The activities of the
Germans were more politically orientated than Britten’s, and related to specific
socialist projects rather than general humanitarian aims. But like Britten, they
experimented with the integration of music into non-professional communities. The
Plöner Musiktag was one such attempt, made in 1930. Hindemith composed a whole
day’s vocal and instrumental music-making for the citizens of a small town, using
whatever talents there were, and leading up to a concert to be given the same evening.
Much of Hindemith, Weill and Eisler’s music was aimed at workers’ choirs and
schools. Ordinary people were to participate actively in music as they do at school or
in church. The Lutheran service for which Bach wrote his Cantatas, with chorales to
be sung by the entire congregation, provided them with a model. The slogan of the
1929 Baden-Baden Festival was: ‘Making music is better than listening to it’.
Pilot Schemes
Hindemith, Weill and Eisler evoked an idealised classroom, in which a stern but
benevolent teacher and a diligent pupil put their minds to whatever matter is at hand.
No naughty schoolboys here! In sharp contrast to Britten, where even the most modest
occasional piece is thought of as a little work of art, the Germans deliberately
underlined the dialectical content of their music. They liked the homilies of Bertolt
Brecht’s ironical parodies of pedantry. Brecht’s idea of a play illuminating a sermon
provided the stimulus for a new kind of community musical enterprise. It was to be
called, quite simply, Lehrstück.
The first such teaching piece had music by Hindemith and was actually titled
Lehrstück. It preached that scientific discovery and technological innovation are of
value only insofar as they directly serve humanity: a topical subject after some of the
early long-distance solo flights. Lindbergh had crossed the Atlantic in 1927. On the
stage is the wreckage of a plane. The pilot is alive, but hurt, and he asks the assembled
bystanders for help. A debate as to whether or not this help should be given follows.
(There is no differentiation intended between performers and audience and there are
choruses for all to join in.) The teacher sets out the argument in favour of helping the

pilot. He explains how the mission has been of great concern and benefit to humanity.
It has been reported throughout the world and its progress has been followed with
bated breath. As the investigation proceeds, it turns out that the aviator’s flight was
quite pointless. The truth is, nobody benefits from it, or for that matter cares about it.
Hindemith’s Lehrstück is not a musical masterpiece, and nor are most of those which
followed it. Perhaps only the school opera, Der Jasager (The Yea-Sayer) by Kurt
Weill, contains moments of such poignancy as to transcend the immediate practical
purpose. Despite its unsavoury text (telling of a boy who has to agree to be sacrificed
for the common good) it is a little masterpiece.
Experiments in community music no more constitute a single style than does
modernism. Educational ventures, carnivals, festivals, or even performing groups
formed by individual composers help to spread music to the large part of the
population which has few opportunities to hear live music. Such enterprises create
new settings in which composers, performers and listeners can all work together. But
by themselves such endeavours do not necessarily produce enduring works of music.
Avant-garde composers would do well to remember Britten’s advice and take
advantage of opportunities outside the professional orchestras and opera houses,
rather than depend exclusively on musical institutions which may no longer have
room for them. But such pragmatism will not help a composer to avoid the fact that
when he is musically ambitious and wants to attempt the large-scale forms, his
survival is linked to the survival of appropriate institutions for their performance.
Masterpieces rarely get written to order according to some recipe, any more than they
flourish in a vacuum. It is doubtful whether there is any merit in artistic enterprises,
however worthy, which positively exclude the very possibility of creating something
special. Who would not exchange myriad good intentions for a good tune? But then
again, who can say for sure how you get one?

