REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 4: A Licence for Licence
TRANSMISSION: 9 December 1987 – Radio 4

To be ‘avant-garde’ means being ahead of one’s time and going out in front to show
the way. An avant-garde composer is a kind of prophet, telling a truth that is not yet
revealed to all. But avant-garde music doesn’t necessarily have to result from a
conscious plan; a great composer sometimes cuts through prevailing conventions
without apparent forethought. ‘Art is individualism,’ wrote the Viennese poet Peter
Altenberg in 1912, ‘and individualism is a destructive and transforming force. What
art seeks to destroy and transform is the monotony of type, the slavery of habit, the
tyranny of convention and the degradation of people to the level of machines’.
Altenberg pours scorn upon the very notion of common values. The individual’s
perceptions are to be placed above everything and, in art, determine what is good and
bad. He stands in a hostile relationship to the world around him. Only faith in the self
and the absolute commitment to the dictates of the imagination which ‘never ceases to
stray in the space that has no human paths’ can save the artist, and help him to
preserve his integrity.
In the years before the First World War, dressed in the stiff collars and ties of the
period, artists worked in a hostile environment. Little was available for them except
cheap accommodation and café life. Composers who did not happen to be performers
had few opportunities to get their works played or even make a living as teachers, if
their views happened to conflict with those of the establishment. They were sustained
only by their sense of mission. Theirs was a necessary condition of aggressive
confrontation. Audiences were scandalised and provoked by the way new works rode
roughshod over convention, and in turn reacted angrily; and perhaps rightly so. They
had not asked that artists should question their beliefs or way of life. The composers
of that time could not fairly be dismissed as a collection of bungling amateurs. They
had, after all, inherited the sophistication and technical refinements of a highly
developed culture, and justified what they did by a moral belief that art did not exist
merely to amuse or decorate the lives of the rich bourgeoisie. They were not primarily
aiming to create a new language of art. Content, rather than convention, determined
the form of their work.
Their integrity created misunderstanding; the audience could no longer recognise
form in the music it was offered, and so dismissed it as anarchic. Like Monteverdi,
300 years earlier, composers might have defended themselves against their critics by
saying: ‘I do not do things by chance. Have faith that the modern composer builds on
foundations of truth.’
The stormy career and gradual public acceptance of Gustav Mahler is a good example
of what the ‘modern composer’ had to put up with. In the Vienna of his time he was
adored by only a devoted minority, and his symphonies were generally despised for
their stylistic incongruities, their overblown rhetoric and the banality of some of their

1

melodies. But taste changes and the very faults came to be perceived as virtues. The
stylistic incongruities are now believed to reflect the personality of the artist, and are
accepted as integral parts of enlarged musical forms which convey a new type of
aesthetic experience.
Two world wars and several social and technological revolutions later, the particular
brand of self-confidence which enabled fellow- musicians to reject Mahler and his
like no longer exists. Arbiters of taste are no longer as sure of themselves as they
were, and as a result are more tolerant, even supporting cultural manifestations which
they do not claim to understand. This apparent broadmindedness does not necessarily
indicate that music which once seemed iconoclastic and rebarbative has mellowed and
become acceptable, nor that what is being written today is in line with public taste.
Quite the contrary: people believe that the modern composer is doing something
worthwhile, even when his work is not instantly appreciated. It is no longer assumed
that he is to be isolated and left to fend for himself. He is given more commissions
and opportunities to have his work performed. But there is not enough room for all
that gets written to be played in the ordinary symphony concerts. So it has to be hived
off into special modern music concerts which attract their own specialised audiences.
There is no place for the classical repertoire in these concerts.
The Self-Imposed Ghetto
The founding fathers helped to put modern music into a ghetto. They responded
scornfully to official disapproval and public rejection. If the world had no use for
them, they would have no use for it. Licking his wounds, Schoenberg set up a Society
for Private Musical Performances in 1911, in Vienna. He included in its rules that ‘the
performances shall be in all respects private. Guests shall not be admitted and
members shall be obligated to abstain from giving any public report of the
performances and other activities of the Society, and especially to write or inspire no
criticisms, notices or discussions of them in periodicals.’
This was extremely high-minded. Speaking as the Society, Schoenberg opposed
‘irrelevant virtuosity’ and the ‘attainment of personal success’. ‘The only success that
an artist can have here,’ he writes sternly, ‘is that of having made the work and
therewith its composer intelligible.’ The performances were to be ‘removed from the
corrupting influence of publicity; that is, they must not be directed toward the winning
of competitions and must be unaccompanied by applause or demonstrations of
disapproval’.
There was more to this secrecy than wounded pride and frustrated ambition; it was an
uncompromising refusal to accept the prevailing conditions of public artistic life. At
the time Schoenberg was organising his Society, his own style of composition was at
its most radical. Previously, in Pelleas and Melisande and in the Gurrelieder, he had
written for the huge post- Wagnerian orchestra, but now he turned away from the kind
of large, expansive forms associated with it. In his first Chamber Symphony of 1906,
he condensed the customary four movements of the symphony into a single
uninterrupted form less than 20 minutes long, and reduced his orchestra to a mere 15
players. A handful of wind players—his favoured clarinets predominating—were
pitted against solo strings. He replaced the classical contrast between movements and
rejected Wagnerian ebb and flow. He despised the decorative aspect of orchestral

2

colour for its own sake (what he later termed ‘the blessing of the dressing’), and
reconstituted the sober formal and instrumental values of chamber music even when
writing for the orchestra.
With his chamber orchestra, Schoenberg established a totally new concept, which has
now become standard practice. The modern chamber orchestra differs from the
classical orchestra in that each individual player has a solo part. The idea was
anticipated by Wagner in his Siegfried Idyll. There are now many chamber orchestras,
all on the pattern worked out by Schoenberg; they have become the contemporary
composer’s preferred medium.
The development of the chamber orchestra has affected the whole field, feature films
and advertising as well as serious music. Composers used to employ full symphony
orchestras for films, but now generally prefer a chamber orchestra. The full orchestra
only appears in spectaculars or when the composer is required to convey an archaic or
well-upholstered impression, for instance when emphasising the solidity or class
superiority of a product.
Schoenberg moved forward towards a new and concise style in which each concrete
object becomes ‘simultaneously its own statement, development and recapitulation’,
and connections are cut to a minimum. These statements were not like melodies in the
first violins but were placed throughout the orchestra, and he excluded the old
hierarchies of easily recognisable principal lines and accompaniments. This
immediacy and self-containment has never ceased to trouble conventional concertgoers. But it is the stock-in-trade of applied music, where the composer has only a
split second to make his point. This style is so much taken for granted that old films
with their extended musical sequences based on traditional 19th century forms sound
as quaint as they look.
Schoenberg’s influence has far exceeded his popularity. In the few years before 1914,
he brushed aside the established principles of consonance and dissonance, and the
forms based on tonality, which had grown up with the symphony. Each of
Schoenberg’s compositions was based on a specific idea which controlled every
aspect of the music. Prevailing textures are polyphonic and complex, and the
disappearance of tonal relations means that the rightness or wrongness of the way in
which the parts fit together can only be decided idiosyncratically by the composer’s
own ear. The listener can no longer invoke guidelines from his experience of previous
music; if occasionally something reminds him of some music of the past, this is
coincidental.
In Schoenberg’s own estimation, his works were nothing less than a renewal of the
whole classical tradition. He affected a patrician scorn for what he considered
arbitrary modernistic experiments, an attitude which was not—and for that matter still
is not, easy to reconcile with what he himself wrote. Something of his pain comes
over in his famous dictum, ‘I do not write modern music, it is lust badly played.’
Futurism and a Fascist Ideal
However innovative Schoenberg’s own music was, in his mind it remained firmly
within traditional limits. He seemed to wish to carry the whole burden of the past
upon his shoulders. A sense of personal responsibility separates him from other

3

contemporary philosophies of modern music, and in particular those of the Futurists,
whom he certainly despised. He used the words ‘futurist’ and modernist’ as terms of
abuse when talking about colleagues whom he did not admire, like Stravinsky.
Of course the Futurists were painters rather than composers, but they produced
theories about music, if not actual music of any consequence. But their ideas
influenced the later development of modern music, anticipating what took place after
the Second World War. They wished modern art to express the new world of speed
and rapid transformations. They stressed ‘the sensuous, enveloping and penetrating’
quality of music; and the way it ‘persisted in the nerves after the manner of a vapour
or a perfume ... its tendency towards analysis and the way it can sum up the infinity of
sensations in a stirring moment’. They condemned the way music-making had
become constricted by closed forms. Composers had become fetishistic in their
pursuit of virtuosity and what the Futurists called ‘technicism’; this had confined the
genius of the great composers of the past—they named Bach, Beethoven and
Chopin—to a ‘maniacal pursuit of musical architecture and of music-for-music’s
sake, scattering and chilling the stirring ardour, the themes and the “finds” in the
midst of tiresome developments and depressing repetitions’. All imitations of classical
music were condemned as a ‘defeat’ or a ‘disguised impotence’. New music was to
break with all such categories, and to express great ‘economic, erotic, heroic,
aviational and mechanical dynamism’.
Futurists did not, and with such ideas perhaps could not themselves produce music of
any significance. They not only wanted to do away with fixed forms, hut tried to
replace conventional musical instruments with a variety of newly invented noise
machines, which performed some sort of sound montage. Theirs was the first attempt
to reject the very existence of a music symbolising a dying world. Normally, a
composer writes a passage for flute, or the kettle drum and the instrument colours his
invention. But for iconoclastic outsiders to music, as the Futurists were, flutes or
kettle drums themselves symbolise a culture. Their very shapes, colours and sounds
signify something, long before any music is written for them. For Futurists, traditional
instruments were remnants of an ancient civilisation which had to be destroyed. Small
wonder then, that they soon adopted the views of Mussolini’s Fascism!
Schoenberg and his school wrote precisely what the Futurists condemned as ‘tiresome
developments’ and for conventional forces, believing that these would continue to be
appropriate for an almost limitless expansion of musical thought. No new instruments
need be invented, nor need the present ones be adapted. It was possible to extend the
expressive range of their music by finding new ways of playing old instruments and
creating a new bel canto for the human voice.
But Stravinsky and Edgard Varèse, while formally rejecting the more ridiculous ideas
of the Futurists, were influenced by them, as their approach to instruments, in
particular, shows. Like the Futurists, they assigned a symbolic function to them,
Although most of the time working within a traditional milieu, Stravinsky rarely
allows the instrument to go unobserved in his works as if merely carrying the music
he writes for it. The violin in the Soldier’s Tale is a devil’s violin, almost an actor in
the drama; the four string players of Stravinsky’s string quartet and the wind
ensemble in the octet, in their marionette-like artificiality, evoke the antics of circus
clowns. The meaning of the music is conveyed by the very choice of the instruments.

4

But Stravinsky was far too refined an artist to fall in with the superficial brutalism of
the Futurist mentality. Prokoliev, ilonegger, Mossoby and Antheil all imitated its
superficialities while failing to understand its significance.
Musical Assembly Lines
But it is Varèse who got to the heart of Futurist thought. Despite the smallness of his
oeuvre, he stands with Schoenberg as a father of radical modernism. He replaced the
conventional orchestra with large percussion ensembles, adding wind and brass
instruments, which provided mechanical signals and the effects of mass and volume
in space. He turned the Futurists’ experiments with their Heath Robinson noisemontage contraptions into a work-able reality. Or, at least, we can imagine some
primitive form of Varèse’s music emerging from the strange instruments to be
observed in their photographs. Nobody actually remembers what the Futurists’
orchestras sounded like, and there is a certain poetic justice in the fact that the noise
of painters should survive only in visual records.
But Varèse’s music is not naive, nor mechanical in effect. His music is not conceived
of as secondary to the actual instrumental forces he employs. In his works, from
Intégrales of 1925 to lonisation of 1931, the percussion ensembles are freed from
their classical role as providers of punctuation and emphasis, and are given the weight
of the musical material and argument. This could only be done by combining
individual sounds of metal and wooden drums, bells and rattles, into fastidiously
heard colour complexes, layered so as to provide their own foregrounds and
backgrounds, fixed events and colourwashes.
Varèse’s percussive sound world evokes an urban rather than a rural landscape. But
this is not of primary importance: the real point is that the way the music is performed
resembles the assembly line of a modern factory. Each player, as if part of a
mechanical process, makes a designated signal, meaningless on its own. All the
signals, when put together, make music in which the individual player is an operative,
a cog in the wheel. Like a man playing a bell in a carillon, he has only to follow a
precise instruction. Little else is required of him. Here, Varèse creates a most
powerful image of human alienation. His works are visual events as much as sound
syntheses, but his images are so forceful that even in a recording, one is aware of their
extraordinary physicality.
Varèse cannot normally be performed in symphony concerts, and it is only in the
post-war period that people have ceased to regard him as a totally peripheral figure.
Until the Fifties, the appearance of his music on programmes was infrequent, although
like Schoenberg in Vienna, he had been active as a conductor and organiser of his
own concerts in New York earlier on. In the years following the Second World War,
he influenced the development of musique concrete and electronic music, as they
influenced him. He stated that he had stopped composing in the Thirties because he
could go no further without electronic means. Many of the most important younger
composers: Boulez, Zenakis, Nono, Birtwistle, Stockhausen and Cage, directly reflect
his influence, both in their choice of sound worlds and in their dismissal of the sonata
principle and all that goes with it. The choice of instrumental forces, rather than theme
or motif, gives form to their music.
Sixties Flamboyance

5

The present-day avant-garde get many of their musical ideas from the great figures of
the earlier part of the century, but their role in society and their psychological makeup are quite different. The turn of the century modernists made an emotional attack on
convention and believed that art was justified only by an inner ethical imperative.
Avant-garde composers of the present have a scientific approach and are intensely
group-conscious. They value experiment for its own sake and their music is often
playful and does not imply a strong negation of anything in particular. The earlier
composers were ostracised by the establishment, but present-day composers are fairly
well served by officialdom. They at least get subsidy and prizes. The fact that support
is available actively encourages a search for new ways of composing—placing
musicians on a similar footing to scientists. Composers seem happy to have a place in
the order of things, which is not solely dependent on the popularity of their work.
One of the few contemporary composers who echo the old avant-garde in wanting to
change the world is John Cage. In the Sixties, he and other composers influenced by
him, including Stockhausen, wanted to change the very parameters of art, blurring the
line between music and noise. Craftsmanship conspires with consumerism to traduce
the meaning of art. To combat this, Cage introduced an element of chance and random
selection into the act of composition. Reacting against the increasingly detailed
instructions to the performer in avant-garde scores, which had reduced the performer
almost to a machine, Cage now wanted music to become a free activity. Making
music was to be a way of discovering the self, a kind of spiritual journey, rather than a
professional activity, which obliterated the distinction between art and life. The
intrusion of such ideas into professional music-making is not without its comic side,
and few who witnessed the BBC Symphony Orchestra participating in spiritual
exercises under the baton of Stockhausen can have failed to have been impressed.
Taking Schoenberg to Task
None of this seems to have survived for long, and in recent years avant-garde
composers have retrenched and settled down to writing for more or less conventional
forces; probably economic conditions have deteriorated since the Sixties, and there is
less money about to finance exotic undertakings. (Although it is said that a recent
performance of a major new electronic and choral work in Germany cost little under a
million pounds!)
After many experiments, little of the creative ferment of the post-Second World War
years remains, bar slogans and reputations, and any similarity between present-day
music and that of the First World War avant-garde is limited to technical matters. The
crucial quality of inner vision which really justified, or at least explains what was
done then, cannot be transmitted from one age to another.
Of all present-day composers, Pierre Boulez resembles Schoenberg in his
characteristic aggression, negations and ethical posture. Boulez is at one and the same
time a committed defender of the new and the scourge of most new music. He loathes
any kind of traditionalism, but will not support experiments which dispense with solid
technique. He is intolerant of any idea of synthesis of new and old. He wants
composers to pursue a rigorous and righteous path, putting aside what he calls ‘trivial’
and ‘frivolous’ considerations of personal taste.

6

Like Schoenberg, Boulez is a theoretician. But he takes Schoenberg to task for his
‘constant academicism,’ and his ‘timidity after making his discovery’ of the method
of composing with 12 tones. Like middle-period Stravinsky, Schoenberg ‘adopts dead
forms’ [by which he means baroque and classical prototypes] ‘and allows them to
transform musical ideas until these, too, are dead ... Musical invention has been
virtually reshaped by old forms to the point where it suffers and dries up.’
Boulez proposes to ‘jettison the concept of the work as a simple journey starting with
a departure and ending with an arrival’. His music is a systematic search for modes of
organisation which dispense with familiar prototypes. There are to be no more
landmarks to distract the listener’s perception of the musical process and the passing
of time.
Boulez frequently demands a spatial reorganisation of the traditional orchestra.
Anyway he has had enough of old-fashioned concerts. He castigates them as ‘an affair
of famous performers and works that belong in museums, a rapidly dying culture and
one that will die even more rapidly if it receives a blow or two’. He proposes to
‘hasten its death because culture has nothing to do with these sham phenomena of
knowledge’. It would be charitable to attribute such views to temperament, but all the
talk of organisation, of rapidly dying cultures and of blows to be administered to
them, are violent and lack respect for individuality—a bit like the language of
terrorists. He wants to construct a new set of conventions from which everything that
does not fit is to be obliterated. This bears an unfortunate resemblance to a totalitarian
culture with rigorous self- censorship. It is difficult to believe that the creative
imagination could survive in such conditions.
Art which places individual perception at its centre is best suited to a liberal society,
and most likely to provide a bulwark against any attack upon it. But because of the
way avant-garde music has developed, it needs expensive equipment, more time spent
on it and special venues in order to function at all. Difficult, intellectual pieces in the
framework of ordinary concerts inevitably run into trouble and the audience is
confused. But 20th-century society has achieved some sort of grudging reconciliation
with its avant-garde. An influential strand of opinion even believes in the positive
educational and social value of it for its own sake. Better, then, to provide a special
platform for modern music, which will serve to broaden cultural life, bringing new
insights and even affecting the style of music beyond its immediate sphere of
influence.
This would seem to be an entirely beneficial development, and certainly beneficial for
composers. The present-day avant-garde, if it can justifiably be called that, has
gradually been absorbed into the fabric of society and its music is officially
sponsored. The financial and moral support of public institutions certainly brings with
it a sense of constructive enterprise, but compartmentalises modern music. Composers
are granted a position apart from conventional cultural institutions. There is no better
way of removing non-conformism or any threat to established modes of thought, than
by providing a comfortable room in which to practise revolutionary activity. It is a
matter of doubt whether anything can be official and confrontational at the same time.
To be meaningful, an avant-garde has necessarily to be engaged with the world
around it. It only exists in a condition of perpetual questioning and can never be
institutionalised without betraying its essential purpose.

7

One may well ask who now remains to reject the official avant-garde! If officialdom
works true to form, it breeds conformity which remains the enemy of true art. It
breeds academicism, and unquestioned assumptions about what is and what is not
permissible. Where then is the debate about the nature and purpose of modern music?
The romantic, Universalist fervour which was the most important aspect of the
modern movement has withered away, leaving only a preoccupation with technical
details and devices. The self-renewal of modern music demands an escape from the
ghetto into which composers have been pushed or have gone of their own free will;
but where to?

8

