REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 2: An Orchid in the Field of Technology
TRANSMISSION: 25 November 1987 – Radio 4

Art reproduced by mechanical ‘means may be as much a fact of modern life as
electric light, running water and the telephone But while the light removes the need
for candles, the tap the well, and the telephone the messenger, live music-making is
not replaced by recorded music; and not only does it endure, it interacts with
recordings.
Live music-making, which at first seemed to be threatened by the gramophone, is now
enjoying a renaissance, possibly even under its influence. More people are playing
and singing, and the high standards achieved by young performers surely have
something to do with the fact that the repertoire of classical music is widely available
on record. Any negative effect of an experience of music which depends on
recordings is mitigated by the availability and variety of live musical activity.
However great the clash between it and technology, the recording industry at least
helps live music to survive as the motor industry ensures better roads.
In theory, a recording (as the word implies) is only a way of extending the life of a
specific performance, as a photograph catches a passing moment. But as soon as the
recording becomes a product for purchase, there is a legitimate fear that the original
performance from which a recording is made ends up as nothing more than a mould
for manufacturing reproductions. The French economist Jacques Attali mentions this
in his book called simply Noise. He believes that ‘Reproduction ... is the death of the
original, the triumph of the copy.’ In mass production, the mould has almost no
importance or value in itself; it is just a step in the manufacturing process, which in
turn determines its character. When a recording of an orchestra is made, the original
live sound is forgotten.
There may well be—there inevitably must be—a tendency to alter performing
traditions to bring them into line with recording practices. But do not undervalue what
it takes to create a performance worthy of reproduction! It cannot be that a mastertape is nothing more than one factor of an industrial process. Were it so, there would
be no difference between a synthetically manufactured rendering of a piece of music,
and a recording of a real performance. Even a synthesised tape, where the process of
making the music is technological, still could not be regarded as a mere mould for
reproduction, because electronic sound production, too, is determined by artistic, as
well as technical, considerations.
But when the music on the tape is performed by musicians in a recording session,
there is an obvious conflict of interests. Record producers and performing musicians
do not necessarily share the same goals. What is important in the concert hall may be
less important in the recording studio. The greater level of accuracy demanded for a
record significantly alters musical practice. This makes demands on the musicians

which they can generally meet, but not without taking their attention away from
matters of interpretation. The way these problems are solved each time, rather than
any theoretical judgment about the effect of technology, will determine whether or not
recording techniques can be reconciled with existing orchestral practices.
If a recording were only a faithful copy of what had happened in the studio, it would
be run-of-the-mill, like any other mass-produced object. Of course, the pressings of a
record are identical, but that does not make them identical with the performance
which they record, however advanced the technology. On the contrary, the
technological process can very often be shown to have increased the difference
between the sound of the original performance and the recording made from it.
During a recording session, only the microphone hears first-hand what is played, as an
audience might hear it, although the producer will listen for a while in the studio
during the rehearsal so that the character of his recording takes account of the live
sound He will have set the microphones to simulate what a listener ideally hears, or, if
that is not possible, to create foregrounds and backgrounds, to point up particular
players and even adjust the acoustical properties of the studio. There is continuous
manipulation of the sound based on a reading of the score and decisions as to how
best to realise it. Neither the producer nor his equipment is purely passive in
character. Like a driver with a gearshift, he steers the microphones, probing the
sounds and altering their proportions. He balances his reading of the music with the
decisions of the performers; he balance natural acoustics with the need for audibility
and clarity. In doing all this, the action of the microphone should be indiscernible; a
recording must not tell tales.
The sound picture obtained inevitably differs from that of the live performance, but
must create the illusion that it is natural. A recording discriminates between its
constituent sounds, categorises and concentrates them as if synthesising fragments
into a total picture. It eliminates the physical distance between listener and performer.
Although this is different from the way music is performed, it is not unlike the way
composers compose. They, too, join little bits together to create what becomes, in
performance, a continuous whole.
Composer and performers are like magicians, ‘maintaining a natural distance from
reality’, while the record producer is more like a surgeon, ‘penetrating deeply into the
web of the music’. This metaphor is taken from Walter Benjamin. Talking of the
relationship of an original to its reproduction, he suggests that: ‘The equipment-free
aspect of reality has become (in the reproduced work) the height of artifice. The sight
of immediate reality (that is, of live music) has become an orchid in the land of
technology.’ In his essay ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’,
Benjamin was principally concerned with the camera, with film and the reproduction
of fine art. There is a feeling of regret for a time when the problems he raises did not
exist. The uniqueness of an original work of art—which he calls its ‘aura’—was not
questioned. He shows how modern industry has caused the physicality of the original
to disappear and with it the almost mystical feeling for it as a one-and-only object. No
matter how good the reproduction, the aura is lost. This is because ‘the technique of
reproduction detaches the reproduced object from the domain of tradition’. Part of the
aesthetic effect of a picture comes from its uniqueness, and when it is taken out of its
context, the maker’s intentions can no longer be understood.

Consoling the Composer
In music, neither the composer’s nor the performer’s work is self-sufficient. It is the
event they create together which is unique. If the composer were able to bypass the
performer by composing directly into sound, as is possible in electronic music, his
work could then be compared to a painting or a sculpture. When he puts the work
directly on to a tape, it may appear the same as any other recording of an existing
piece of music. But in fact it has some of the properties of an original object. Like a
bronze or an etching which can be reproduced, it has no real location other than on a
tape, although any copy of it is its equal.
If all reproductions, whether of paintings or of music, are partial and inexact then the
original must be superior to the copy. But a recording of music is not just a partial and
inexact copy; it differs from the original live performance, which disappears into thin
air as soon as it is over, while the recording is permanent. In this respect, it is like the
composer’s original score. From the composer’s point of view (and possibly even the
listener’s) the lasting nature of a recording consoles him for any harmful effects. Like
a poet or a painter, he too now has an object for repeated contemplation. The actual
fact of recording, quite apart from altering the sound of a piece of music, can affect
the way that music is used and heard.
So far as fine arts are concerned, for Walter Benjamin, reproduction alters the nature
of an original to such a degree that it changes the viewer’s perception of it. This may
possibly be going a bit far, but is certainly correct when applied to a recording of
music, which is an altogether different object from a live performance.
Of course, the way a work of art is perceived varies from generation to generation. At
some times it is the subject- matter which is of concern, at others purely technical
criteria may seem more important. The impact of a work of art is altered by the
intentions of the artist himself as well as by changing fashions. The Dadaists, for
example, quite deliberately chose their materials to preclude any familiar connections.
Their images are mutually contradictory and defy logical integration. Paradoxically,
reproduction will make them appear more conventional by imposing a false surface
consistency upon them. Similarly, the fragmentation of some avant-garde music—for
example, the improvisatory techniques introduced by John Cage and Karlheinz
Stockhausen and the idea of a musical continuity as a kind of maze where alternative
paths can be taken, as in Pierre Boulez’s Third Piano Sonata—alters the way music is
to be performed and perceived. Recording, however, fixes the fleeting and chance
elements in live performance and distorts the composition by pushing it back into a
tradition from which it meant to escape.
There is a clash here between what the composer is trying to do and the blanketing
effect of technology, in this case representing convention. Incidentally, something
similar happens in classical and baroque music, when cadenzas and free
ornamentation have to be recorded. Here, too, technology undermines artistic
intentions, although less dramatically because even Bach appears to have grown tired
of improvisatory elements in performance practice.
Dada, Cage, Stockhausen and Boulez are, however, special cases. In fact, many of the
ideas of recent music come from observations of what happens when electronic music

is made. Even where composers work in a comparatively familiar language (as I do
myself), the way musical ideas are evaluated and combined today has more in
common with the way electronically generated fragments are synthesised than with
any traditional mode of creating unity. Today’s composer does not write against a
background of fixed metres and forms, which he can assume his potential audience
will recognise, but prefers to construct his continuities out of little bits.
The works of many present-day composers, I am thinking of Gyorgy Ligeti, of Elliott
Carter, of Xenakis, and of Harrison Birtwistle, are based on statistical procedures. The
musical ideas which they will use in their compositions are defined according to
perceptible and measurable properties: for instance, they might select short high notes
played staccato on wind instruments pitted against long sustained notes on cellos and
basses. Such a procedure is called statistical because timbre, duration, interval and
mode of attack, rather than phrase or motif, define the music. Each constituent section
of a composition is built up of material generated statistically and then submitted to
further development. In Atmospheres, by Ligeti, a very dense texture made up of
myriad individual sounds played simultaneously, and overlapping, is gradually altered
and pushed upwards and downwards in pitch until only extremely high-pitched and
low-pitched sounds remain. Here the listener follows the development purely through
changes in pitch and is not required to perceive anything resembling a conventional
melody.
This is one of the reasons why, even when intended for conventional orchestral
forces, avant-garde music does not seem to suffer greatly in recording. Fixing a live
performance even clarifies its meaning, although in familiar classical music, in which
detail has to be related to the overall flow, turning a live interpretation into a fixed
event significantly alters its nature. It might well be that after repeated exposure to
modern works, with the emphasis fairly and squarely on textures which result from
statistically determined sounds, a listener might begin to take the same approach to a
classical work, although, of course, history tells us that the music of the past was not
conceived in this way. Conditioning by recording may alter perception.
No Time to Mull
There would a strong case for conceiving modern compositions for gramophone
records in the first place, as is done with popular music. A modern work on record can
stand on its own. It is then readily available and easily repeatable. The cause of
modern music would be significantly furthered if, instead of sponsoring endless
expensive concerts of first performances, resources were allocated for recording new
works. Commissions to composers could well be channelled through recording
companies rather than concert promoters.
When a work is heard in live performance, the details of its structure have to be
grasped while it is going on; there is no time for mulling over them. A good listener
used to be able to reconstitute a work in his mind from a partial recollection of what
he heard. Schumann surely based his musical criticisms on a single hearing of a new
work. Today’s critic hardly depends on a single hearing.
Study of the written score reveals aspects of the music which do not come across in
performance, but which may be considered of equal and sometimes greater
significance than what is instantly audible. A musician can approximate what he

might hear in performance by reading a score at roughly the speed of the music. But
this is unsatisfactory: on the one hand, less real than listening; on the other, too fast to
allow for deep understanding. The leisurely study of a score can give as much
satisfaction as the study of a text of literature, although a score in itself is not an
autonomous work of art. This must mean that even if its quality may vary, musical
experience can be derived from something which in itself is not the music, as a play
can he conjured up from the text. So a notion that reproduction on disc will inevitably
be inferior to the actual experience of live music cannot be sustained. But the nature
of the experience varies according to the form in which the music is presented. The
authenticity of a recording cannot be put in doubt merely by comparing it with what
was performed live.
Naturally, conductors and performers may conceive an interpretation for the concert
hail; but they have to rethink it for a recording. Many of the great performers of the
past introduced a theatrical quality into their presentation and made good use of it to
put over the essence of a work. Some of the liberties they took sound arbitrary and
absurd when transferred to record, and form a travesty of what is indicated in the
score. Yet there is no way that the recording artist can make interpretation only a
matter of fidelity to the written signs; he has to generate the inner conviction and
pacing which alone make a great live performance.
In the recording studio, musicians do usually try to recreate the atmosphere of the
concert hail. As Lord Reith insisted that radio news readers should wear evening
dress, it might be thought that orchestras should dress up for recordings. You can
almost feel the physical presence of Furtwängler and the Berlin Philharmonic in the
reissues of events that took place 50 years ago. For this reason, a record producer
today will frequently try to use the first complete version of the studio performance as
the basis for the final tape. Some soloists are so accurate that 99 per cent of what they
play first time round is usable. In such cases it is mere pedantry to differentiate
between the status of live performance and recording. But with orchestras, the
problems of maintaining continuous clarity and balance throughout a performance
require ideal rehearsal conditions and a good deal of luck. The likelihood of
individual slips is, of course, much greater.
As soon as musicians have been placed in the position of hearing back their
performance, their concern for detail and sense of different ways of doing things
increases. They become conscious of previously unrealised aspects of their playing.
At this point they can become seduced by what some musicians, like the conductor
Celibidache (who refuses to make records), see as the vain pursuit of the definitive
version. This trap, into which record-makers can easily fall, leads to concentration on
tiny details at the expense of the overall line of a performance. It is a kind of surrender
to the possibilities of the medium itself, which allows for almost infinite division of
the music into fragments which are then glued together by the editor. There is a case
for such attention to detail, especially where, as with new music, the aim is to
represent the composer’s intentions as precisely as he does himself in his score. But
even if the piece is very detailed, as many modern pieces are, it is still better to try to
realise the broad sweep of the music than to get bogged down in its minutiae.
A good performance depends on the players’ capacity to hear and react spontaneously
to each other. For instance, the raging development of the first movement of

Tchaikovsky’s Pathetique is suddenly interrupted: a short silence separates it from a
solo clarinet entry. The player has to perform the silence and must be put into the
frame of mind to do so by what has gone before. Doing it over and over again makes
it less likely that he will be able to play it poetically. Where maniacal conductors
chase after a vision of perfection, spontaneous music-making is replaced by dread.
Many players believe that, short of a total disaster, the first take can only be improved
by patching to replace wrong notes. This is a legitimate improvement because there
might have been a performance where these mistakes were not made; it is not at all
the same thing as the more dubious practice of putting together performances from
innumerable separate sessions, which sometimes, in some apocryphal stories, took
place in different continents, making something which never did exist and probably
could not have existed. That constitutes a quite deliberate deception; the edited
recording tells a lie. The experience of the artificial perfection of records will affect
the concertgoer’s expectations. Even though the listener may be aware that recorded
sound is synthetic and constitutes an illusion, his experience of it influences his taste.
It also affects the sound of orchestras today, and certain conductors are known to
attempt a kind of live imitation of their records in the concert hail. If this continues,
concerts will inevitably lack the brightness and clarity which results when the
microphone has been sorting the sound out in advance.
Nobody who patronises public concerts as a connoisseur of performances will think
that there is anything museum-like about that. It would, in fact, be a very good idea if
visiting a concert were more like visiting a museum. Of course, it takes 80 people
nine hours to prepare a single concert. But nothing prevents turning radio or discs into
a sound museum. Radio programmes or record libraries allow the listener to choose
what he wishes to hear. He can be led from composition to composition of a particular
composer can explore the music of a remote period and of regions of the world far
away from his own. In fact, for most people, hearing famous orchestras in the flesh is
almost as remote as hearing 14th-century motets or Congolese drumming.
Losing Musical Literacy
Before records got in the way, the listener’s appreciation of what goes on in the
concert hall was formed by learning to read music and playing an instrument at home.
Records extend his musical education, but also make it unnecessary, by making it
easy to become familiar with a lot of music which he can neither perform himself nor
hear in public concerts.
Being able to hear so much is a terrific advantage, even if the result is a decline in the
importance of musical literacy. At the same time, records making performances by the
great artists available have surely contributed to the dramatic improvement in amateur
and student music-making. These are the advantages of records; the need to sell them
in large numbers has a less favourable effect.
Record company managers determine what a conductor performs and how he makes
the records. No orchestral manager will now consider appointing a permanent
conductor who is not persona grata with a major recording company. As there are
few recording companies, a tiny number of managers (who are not necessarily
qualified musicians) are virtually running the great orchestras of the world. There

seems to be no obvious way out. When the great recording companies go to the wall
and are replaced by smaller, less imposing ventures, this may be a matter for rejoicing
or at least a step in the right direction, but bankruptcy provides no solution to the
problems of financing the recording and rerecording of the large- scale and
demanding works which form the bulk of the symphonic repertoire.
Technology cannot be wished away and there are things to be done to protect musicmaking from bad recording practices. Public broadcasting has made continual
advances in this direction, but in recent years, the emphasis on public concerts, the
tours of its orchestras, the Proms and its Invitation Concerts has led the BBC to a
decline of interest in the medium of broadcasting itself. There’s been very little work
written specifically for radio and the majority of composers simply use (and are
expected to use) their commissions to write concert music. It surely is important to
pay attention to the development of the medium itself because quality necessarily
deteriorates when there are no technical challenges.
The situation is even worse on television, which for all its technically miraculous
possibilities limits itself almost entirely to the representation of what goes on in the
concert hall and the opera house. The BBC might also have become a producer of
records on a much wider scale than it has. There is no really thought-out archive of
20th-century music on record. With the wealth of available recordings, it could show
itself to be the great museum that it is. This surprising omission probably owes as
much to assumptions about the supposed inferiority of recordings to live music, as to
economics. In fact, no comparison is necessary. The idea of employing composers
and other artists to create original work for records has only been exploited in music
for children’ Pop-music seems light years ahead of classical music in this respect.
In the future it may well be that there will be less need for such initiatives from
recording and broadcasting. With inexpensive high-quality recording equipment
available in every home, with cheap synthesisers and computer programmes for
composition and sound realisation, composers and listeners will be able to make their
own takes and pirate anything else they might need. Certainly, there will be even
greater possibilities for developing musical forms specifically for recorded sound—a
kind of dramatisation of the medium which, as yet, has hardly begun.

