REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 6: Stand Up and Be Misunderstood
TRANSMISSION: 27 December 1987 – Radio 4

Music can serve all kinds of purposes, and there is absolutely no reason why it should
not. The history of music can be written by simply listing the uses to which it has
been put. Song, dance, Mass, national anthem, the Wedding March and the
International, queuing on the telephone, discovering the right motor-oil…I think that
will do...
The best music survives the occasion for which it was originally composed. The
music of Bach and Handel is not appreciated now only for its Christian images, nor
Beethoven’s Pastoral Symphony for its evocation of a countryside near Vienna. Nor
do Mahler’s world-embracing psycho-programmes come across, or at least not
explicitly. The intense experience of listening to music needs no justification and yet
gives more than mere pleasure; and treating it as no more than an adjunct of gracious
living does it no justice. It cannot be glibly dismissed as the entertainment of the
middle classes, nor as a kind of nostalgia for a lost world.
Music expresses the human condition, and as Mendelssohn put it, ‘fills the soul better
than words’. It offers hope and consolation, and helps each individual who can open
himself to it to feel at one with the world. Brahms is supposed to have said to Clara
Schumann that, ‘while others have religion, we have something better’.
Musicians do not have the right to ignore the profound significance of music, even if
they must inevitably fail to meet such exalted demands. Innovation and
experimentation are worth little in themselves, unless they serve expressive intentions.
It then doesn’t matter if they cause incomprehension or misunderstanding; the
important thing is that the artist should be prepared to stand up and be misunderstood.
In the proper sense, being willing to ‘give the public what it wants’, means being able
to respond to its spiritual needs, which is surely not at all the same thing as attempting
to manipulate it.
The very mention of spiritual qualities inevitably sounds old-fashioned. But the values
of music are not so much old-fashioned as universal, which, incidentally, means that
they are not the property of any particular kind of music to the exclusion of any other.
These values should be defended by the people who most frequently attack classical
music for being elitist and antisocial. Environmentalists could include music among
the endangered species. It is easy to describe the harm done to music when it is turned
into an industrial product. More difficult, but no less important, is to recognise that
the musician’s pursuit of technique in isolation equally prejudices its universal values.
In circumstances where music no longer provides what the public requires of it,
nostalgia for some other kind of music should not be scorned as escapism; it is
revulsion from the impoverishment of the modern world.

The technical and formal discoveries of the greatest modern artists were not made for
their own sakes, but to show a version of reality which contradicted what was
commonly portrayed. Kafka’s reality is so extreme that it might easily be supposed
that he is writing in an experimental mode about a fantasy world. Strindberg’s
description of home life was expressionistic in manner precisely because it was true to
his (and not only his) experience. It is not difficult to identify an inner world, violent
and extreme to the point of silence, in the abbreviated microcosms of Webern. Their
versions of reality are more convincing than those of H.G. Wells, Gerhart Hauptmann
or Ravel. But in a comparable list of contemporary artists, the avant-garde might well
appear to have forgotten the investigation of reality and the expression of the human
condition. Modernism has become little more than an institution and hardly anyone
now objects to the disappearance of naturalism. The prejudices of the past have been
overthrown, as has the system of values which lay behind them. Sophisticated
audiences are ready for anything, but in fact they expect too little and avant-garde
artists underline values, such as the primacy of technology, which are officially
sanctioned. The future Kafka, Strindberg or Webern has to be the one who again takes
the lid off convention and gets below its surface. If modern music no longer actively
disturbs contemporary society, it has no further function, and cannot contribute to any
renewal of the symphony.
At present, no such renewal seems likely. Musicians apart, public concerts are really
only esteemed if they are grand occasions, and if they are not, radio or record would
probably do just as well—if not better. Records may not be live, but they are reliable
and at least can be taken off at no extra cost. Much of what is currently to be heard in
the concert hall turns out to be far less spectacular than expected. The wartime slogan,
‘Is your journey really necessary?’ regrettably still applies.
Yet for all its shortcomings, and despite the musicians’ frustrations, an alternative to
the symphony orchestra has not been found. Nor can it be. Short of a cataclysmic
revolution, music-making has to be geared to a large repertoire, many times greater
than even what is required for a national theatre. Not only do the major works of the
last 200 years have to be performed, but at least some new work has to be played.
Only an organisation the size of the symphony orchestra can cope with these
demands. It is a recurring problem for smaller ensembles, like the London Sinfonietta,
which achieved fame for its performances of modern music that they are limited by
their own set-up and cannot expand to take on more ambitious projects without
becoming symphony orchestras all over again. These smaller ensembles are
condemned to go on repeating the same works, as much as are the major orchestras.
After a certain point, repetition does not foster brilliance or new insights.
‘Authentic’ ensembles, which play baroque and classical music as it was originally
intended to sound, offer musicians an exciting change of perspective on familiar
classics; old music becomes new again. But in so far as they wish to perform in public
concerts, they compete with the symphony orchestras, yet have to be confined to
small halls because their sound is not large enough for the big ones. It is all very well
to go back in time, but symphony orchestras developed because more and more
people wanted them. And so would it be with the authentic bands. If their popularity
were to grow so that they had to play to a large audience, they would either have to
give up their size or sacrifice the immediacy of their sound, as did the Amadeus
Quartet when it played in the Albert Hall.

Performers themselves clearly get greater satisfaction from chamber music and would
not regret the break-up of the established orchestra into a variety of specialised
groups; that is, provided their possibility of making a living was not jeopardised.
Their preferences should of course be considered, but music cannot exist for their
benefit alone. The freelance musical life made up of all kinds of bookings can be had
by working for radio and records, but it is hard to combine it with membership of an
orchestra, which is, or ought to be, a full-time job. Without orchestras, there will not
be performances of much that is rightly prized by the public. In any case, in all but the
largest cities, provision for music takes the form of a single orchestra; everybody
knows that it’s hard enough to maintain one orchestra, let alone find funds for
anything else.
Local orchestras are rightly the focus of civic pride, and there cannot be any merit in
chipping away at that. Neglect of established cultural institutions, whatever their
condition, can only further contribute to the neglect of city centres. if an established
orchestra does exist, given good management and a bit of inspiration, it ought to be
possible to achieve a good mix of musical events. One hopes that public taste is not
yet so petrified that it is impossible to reconcile it to adventurous and varied
programming. But it takes inspired leadership, which is not always available.
Some of the more adventurous orchestral managers, such as Ernest Fleischmann in
Los Angeles, and conductors like Pierre Boulez, believe that the problems of the
orchestra cannot be solved without a total overhaul of the way they are organised.
They want to turn orchestras into ‘communities of musicians’, which would have a
larger membership than present-day orchestras and would play not only as a single
unit, but in specialised groups, performing on authentic instruments and playing
chamber music and music of the 20th century repertoire. The players would be paid
enough to keep them from freelancing, and improved rehearsal conditions would lead
to higher standards. The increased power of these orchestras and the eminent
conductors and soloists they would attract would enable them to have considerable
say about what was to be recorded and under what conditions.
A ‘community of musicians’ would be very expensive to implement and would
require super-managers and super-conductors. But the quality of music-making still
depends on the solution of the problems of relationships between the participants,
which the idea of the super-orchestra does not tackle. Enlarged organisation might
even exacerbate the frustrations of the musicians who would depend entirely on a
single employer. What the individual musicians need is a greater sense of
responsibility and personal involvement than is possible under existing conditions.
There is not really much point in worrying about the established orchestras. Any new
resources should be put into the up-and-coming younger players, who have a strong
sense of motivation which must not be frittered away. If there are to be new
institutions, it would make more sense to put more of what are called ‘postgraduate’
orchestras on to some kind of professional footing. This would at least lengthen the
period before the excellent talent from the youth orchestras is thrown into the hurlyburly of the profession. It is certainly the educational sector rather than the way the
established orchestras work that holds the key to any cure for the malaise of the
orchestral world. The youth orchestras currently achieve a remarkable standard of

performance and, potentially, at least could provide interesting programming.
Economics have already dictated that it is only such quasi-educational bodies that can
put on much new work, or for that matter the late romantic repertoire which demands
huge forces, such as the Gurrelieder by Schoenberg, played recently at the Proms by
the National Youth Orchestra, Strauss’s Alpine Symphony or Mahler’s Eighth
Symphony. Although the Musicians’ Union must protect the livelihood of its
members, it should take the initiative in setting up such new orchestras.
Even if a more imaginative use of available funds could improve things, the idea of
renewing the symphony orchestra is impossible without a complete rethinking of its
attitude to new music. The practical way to give composers experience is to appoint
composers-in- residence, as is already common with American orchestras, but less so
here. All orchestras, particularly those involving young players, should have two
salaried composers as a matter of course. They learn as well as teach; they write for
the orchestra and help in choosing the programmes.
Composers, especially the more avant-garde ones, do in fact now write imaginatively
for instruments, and the development of the expressive and virtuosic potential of some
previously neglected sections of the orchestra is one of the real achievements of
modern music. People write more interestingly for percussion and brass than they
used to; there is a new way of thinking about composing for large forces, exploiting
what Ligeti calls ‘saturated polyphony’: a large number of players each having their
own part, contribute to mass effects. They create a new sound world. But this kind of
scoring, which is now commonplace, fails to satisfy the requirements of performers if
they are to remain thinking musicians. They are treated as if they were the paint, not
the brush.
Compositional criteria, such as those found in writing for string quartet, must inform
the way orchestral parts are laid out. A performer is happiest when what he has to
play stands out and makes sense on its own. He can then learn his part by choosing
how to realise the phrases he has been given and build them up meaningfully. His
own inner rhythm, his feeling for nuance and his way of colouring the music by
changes of tone production are all enhanced when he combines on equal terms with
other players. He concerts with them, sometimes standing forward as a soloist and
sometimes falling back to accompany his partners. The integrity of the individual
voice is the determining factor of good polyphony. This makes chamber music the
ideal vehicle for the expression of personal musicality, incorporating the human
breath and the ebb and flow of passing time into a continuous form.
Inevitably, the number of performers involved in orchestral music makes an automatic
and complete transference of chamber music practices impossible. Nevertheless, the
textures of classical and romantic music do reflect those of the string quartet, at least
until Wagner. He made himself unloved by players by leaving them to scrub,
repeating uninteresting accompanimental figures for long stretches. From Mahler
onwards orchestration took on a kaleidoscopic character: the voices of chamber music
are divided up among the different instruments. Today, an orchestral player rarely has
anything self-explanatory to play in a new score. Listening to the others and knowing
where to play is as important as knowing what to play: the notes make only marginal
use of his skills. Even if composers write this way to produce new textures and new
sound worlds and critics agree to evaluate music on their terms, players will never

relate to these practices; they have to be made to feel that they are exploiting their
skills to the full, and it is only when the individual players have a degree of
independence and personal choice, that the conductor can consider them as
interpreters, rather than degenerating himself into a traffic-policeman.
Boulez and his followers believe that contemporary music has to seek what he calls,
‘global, generalisable solutions’. He means that composers have to formulate an
entirely new language or musical practice, to get away from what he calls ‘humdrum,
particular solutions that somehow remain the composer’s personal property’. But
humdrum or not, it would seem that the tide is going the other way. Until
comparatively recently, there had been no sign at all that composers would come
round to even considering the problems of the performer in the orchestra in the same
way as the soloist. Yet they must be tackled if modern composition is once again to
play anything more than a peripheral role in the symphonic repertoire. Old and
existing traditions cannot just be swept aside: nor can they simply be reconstituted.
There have, however, been signs that composers are becoming conscious of the
problem. The latest shift in style is towards a freer, more spontaneous and immediate
attitude to composition. The impact and prolixity of Mahler’s global visions, as well
as the belated discovery of the works of Charles Ives, written in America in the early
part of the century, have influenced composers to reconsider whether artistic unity is
necessarily the same thing as stylistic uniformity.
It is not just new techniques that have attracted composers. The remarkable thing
about Ives is his discovery that it is possible to combine and even play at the same
time what amounts to nothing less than different sorts of music. In a piece such as his
Fourth Symphony, expressionistic, splashy textures, reminiscent of Scriabin and
Debussy, are combined with popular band marches, fully if sometimes wrongly
harmonised hymn tunes and even bits of ragtime. The result is a polychrome
landscape, pantheistic and all-embracing in intention and not in the least like pastiche.
It is likely that Luciano Berio’s Sinfonia, first performed in New York in 1969, owes
its inspiration to Ives. Up to that time, Berio’s work was typical of avant-garde
serialism. He had been one of the pioneers of electronic composition, and the
possibilities of montage in that medium may have made him particularly receptive to
Ives’s ideas. In the Sinfonia, he employs a vocal group, who are given fragments of
various texts to speak and sing against orchestral music which includes a huge
number of references to music other than Berio’s own. One section even incorporates
an entire movement of a Mahler symphony as a background.
Berio’s Sinfonia marks the beginning of a shift away from a mechanical model of
musical structure and challenges many of the assumptions of new music, from
Schoenberg onwards. Whether directly influenced by Berio, or merely because the
idea was in the air, composers as diverse as Tippett and Shostakovich and former
serialists like Henze, Zimmermann and Maxwell Davies have opened up the stylistic
confines of their work to include other musics, including even classical and romantic
modes of expression, not merely as quotations, but as an integral part of the fabric of
the pieces. While serialists and post-serialists continue to believe that music has to
derive from a pre-formed matrix, such as a group of intervals, which stylistically are
to determine what may or may not happen, post-modernists, as they are now called,

maintain that all styles of music, whatever their provenance, are available to them. It
is not now to be a matter of one composer being influenced by another but of
purposely extracting evocative and resonating images, sometimes with all their
surrounding apparatus of harmony and orchestration, and placing them into new
locations. It is possible to ‘lift’ an isolated fragment of Stockhausen’s Gruppen, or
Vaughan Williams’ Tallis Fantasia, or a bit of Miles Davis, and incorporate it as a
kind of objet trouvé into a new piece.
This is not quite unprecedented in the history of music. In his own time, Mozart
combined what were then regarded as irreconcilable styles of composition. In the
Magic Flute for instance, old-fashioned, Handelian music can lead straight into an
aria, like ‘Ach, ich fühls’, which draws on Gluck’s austere purity. Mozart often
contrasts old conventions with his own new expressive chromatic harmony,
sometimes within a few bars. The range of styles available to Mozart could not have
been as numerous or as contradictory as they are now, but they certainly did not go
unnoticed.
Whatever the merits or demerits of such seductive and even, it might be thought, selfdestructive ways of composing, they allow some escape from the strait-jacket of
stylistic exclusivity. Doubtless it is only too easy to see the frivolous and promiscuous
aspects of this approach and it could easily degenerate into something little better than
stamp-collecting. But it opens composers’ minds. Music, though variously packaged
as post-modernism, new simplicity, or neo-romanticism, is a sincere reaction against
the rigidity of formalistic thinking that preceded it.
The history of music can be understood as a play between seemingly opposed
considerations: on the one hand, the higher ends of art are obtained through superior
structural forms, as was once the fugue, and the transient beauties of melody and
harmony are raised to a higher plane only when integrated into complex forms; on the
other hand, technical procedures exist to ensure clarity and continuity and create a
background for individual moments of particular intensity and beauty. The one
approach sees the significance of music in its formal procedures, the other in its
melodies. The great masterpieces are not only those which balance both approaches,
but also those which push one or other to an extreme. Beethoven’s Great Fugue is a
masterpiece even if its overwhelming structural integration is achieved at some cost of
sound quality and playability. Schubert’s Death and the Maiden quartet does not
commend itself to us primarily for formal reasons. It would appear that emphasis
swings like a pendulum between these approaches.
Post-modernist thinking, though as yet ill- defined arid existing in a setting where
anything goes, nevertheless marks a swing back to a forgotten dimension of
musicality essential to the revitalisation of the symphony. Composers have become
suspicious of system. Though still in its thrall, they try to find the self-confidence
necessary to invent spontaneously, without need for justification. The resultant return
to the use of familiar material is not necessarily a step back, if the composer is not in
full flight from his own time.
Mendelssohn’s belief that music goes beyond words is an imposing concept for a
mere musician. It is a kind of sentiment which can too easily be mouthed without
anybody being sure of what it is meant to convey. When the great philosophers

included music in their scheme of things, they assigned it special attributes. For them,
music represented the noble and the good; it variously portrayed the emotions and
expressed man’s perpetual longing for redemption. To use less highfalutin’ language,
music helps people to forget their day- to-day concerns, to pack up their worries, and
to swing. After hearing one of my own pieces, a jazz-loving friend remarked: ‘It’s
cool and it’s hot but it doesn’t swing.’
When music communicates itself to the listener, he sways or swings, and if good
manners demand that he sit still so as not to disturb his neighbour, he internalises the
repetitive movement of the rhythm. For this to happen, the composer must put
together all the available constituents of music that they may transcend themselves. It
is not enough for him to follow a set of rules, nor even to imagine the music he wants
to create in his inner ear; he is required to perform a sacred rite, transforming base
elements into gold. The player of the music does the same thing; he too takes the
written symbols and has to transform them into living sound.
Each participant in the musical process— whether listener, composer or performer—
is a principal actor; music has no place for supporting roles. It involves the whole man
and demands of him his complete attention. Each individual has to make music
entirely on his own, while remaining in step with everybody else in order that
harmony may be achieved. If he is able to speak with his own voice while retaining
his proper place, he will indeed be in paradise.
Much conspires each day to prevent the realisation of harmony. Everybody wants to
draw attention to his own part at the expense of the other and the aggrieved and
excluded howl in anger or go off into a corner to start their own dance. Some believe
that the journey of the symphony has been so long already that there cannot now be
much hope of reconstituting its happy ideal. It is absurd and irrelevant to consider the
huge, pluralistic and complicated world that music has become in terms of what it
originally may have been.
But against all the odds and against the prognostications of many who, when they
hear the classical symphony orchestra, believe that they are listening to the band on a
sinking ship, music-making in all its forms plays an unprecedentedly large part in
modern life. Nobody except the most blinkered believer in a core curriculum could
again relegate music to an extra-curricular activity, nor deny that among all the arts, it
offers a unique model of human relationships. Its success and popularity in the
present-day would exceeds anything that could have been imagined, even 50 years
ago. The symphony is the flagship of this whole culture. It should give everyone the
opportunity to breathe the air of paradise. Music is the pursuit of harmony.

