REITH LECTURES 1987: The Survival of the Symphony
Alexander Goehr
Lecture 3: Past and Present
TRANSMISSION: 2 December 1987 – Radio 4

The very ubiquity of music, the probability that organised noise will always be with
us, endangers the concentrated listening which music demands. There is not a
musician who does not shrink from soft music with the soup, but someone has to
supply this commodity, and they get paid for writing and playing it. There are jobs in
it. The situation is somewhat paradoxical: more and better quality music results in
trivialisation.
Of its nature, the public concert is a kind of ceremony and its values resemble those of
church, theatre and public speaking. Respect for complex material clearly presented,
subtlety and variety, smooth and logical transitions and meaningful surprise are good.
Banality, needless repetition, garrulousness, crude rhetoric and vulgarity are to be
avoided. A lot of what composers believe to be innovatory is nothing other than the
rejection of these same bad qualities; modem artists are impatient of sterile, oldfashioned formulae and exaggerated and false homage to yesterday’s ways. ‘Tradition
ist schlamperei,’ (tradition is slovenliness) Mahler is alleged to have remarked. But
what he probably meant was that the very people who were outraged by any lapse
from the good old ways were in fact betraying what they thought they were
defending.
Tradition is not a matter of hard and fast rules, and innovation occurs within it,
gradually and gently modifying its character. Again and again the great innovators of
the past claimed to defend tradition against its misuse by lesser men. Monteverdi and
Gluck, Mendelssohn and Schumann, as well as Wagner and Schoenberg, all in their
differing ways believed that they were rescuing music from the dissipations of their
own contemporaries. ‘Tradition is entirely different from habit, even from an
excellent habit, since habit is by definition an unconscious acquisition and tends to
become mechanical, whereas tradition results from a conscious and deliberate
acceptance. A real tradition is not the relic of a past that is irretrievably gone; it is a
living force that animates and informs the present... Tradition presupposes the reality
of what endures,’ wrote Stravinsky in his Poetics of Music.
Tradition and innovation go hand in hand. Their combined effect is to make music
progressively more subtle and refined, and in so doing, increase the demands it makes
upon the listeners. But such demands may conflict with what the listener demands of
the music. As with everything else in life, what no longer corresponds to current taste
is likely to be rejected. However, most working musicians will prefer to ignore
changes in taste. They remain rooted to their classical base. When music has to be
written, rehearsed and performed, there’s little time or energy for any other
consideration. An oboist does not mind whether he is performing Handel’s Fireworks
or Peter and the Wolf. He has to keep his reed wet to produce a good tone from his

1

instrument.

The disciplines of the profession have to be respected if it is to retain its authenticity,
and alterations in practices are likely to be regarded with suspicion. Musicians think
as they do because they are committed to their work, while their paymasters and the
public are only interested in it if it amuses them. Consequently, musicians interpret
any criticism of their way of doing things as an attempt to force short-cuts on them,
forgetting that in the past musicians had to meet the exact requirements of their
patrons, whether these were or were not in the higher interests of the musicians’
calling.
The history of music is one of continuous adaptation, made unhesitatingly if and
where required, without regret for the past. The preserving of tradition only becomes
an issue when it is threatened; when it is felt that what is demanded by the public
actually diminishes the music. It is not innovation which undermines classical music,
it is commerce. With so much music being bought and sold, the dissipation of
attentive listening arouses fear that music in its old form might disappear altogether.
The culture of the old concert hall may not be the only one, nor the most modern, but
its customs and ceremonies remain worthwhile because they represent a relationship
between music, the performers and the audience.
When manner replaces matter, anti style is no longer determined by content, the
relationship deteriorates. Performance consists of personality display, and elegance
becomes an end in itself. Rituals are remembered while their meaning is forgotten.
Music becomes ‘hardly more than a somewhat clumsy excuse for the selfglorification of musicians and the growth of a new industrial sector’.
The very term ‘symphony’ contains ideas of ‘accord’ and agreement’. Music is
harmony bringing disparate, even conflicting sounds into cohesion and illustrating an
Enlightenment ideal of tolerance. In the ‘mathematical’, Pythagorean concept of the
world, music was considered to be the microcosm of the great movements of stars and
planets. In addition, it was a model of the way in which men were to deal with each
other. Pythagoreanism was an ideal of moderation, and Pythagoras himself was
sometimes identified with Apollo. In the classical age, this spirit lent an air of moral
earnestness to the pursuit of music.
The strength of the classical style lies in its universality. It is not founded on a
preference for consonance and euphony, but reflects a way in which all imaginable
sounds may be brought together. It was believed to contain a lesson in human
behaviour. Leibnitz implied this when he described the way in which ‘dissonances are
mixed with harmonious chords to stimulate the listener’s interest in what will happen
next, so that he may become concerned about the outcome and is all the more pleased
when everything is restored to order’.
Melody, harmony and rhythm can all be understood in isolation, but it is when they
are joined together that the alchemy of music occurs. Dissonance creates a bond of
intensity within the confines of musical form. It represents a suspension of
equilibrium and the direction of the music is towards its reestablishment.

2

Learning to Imitate
The music and the practice of the classical age of the symphony has been so widely
accepted that it is commonly regarded as our own, rather than as the music of a
comparatively distant period of history. Its values are taken for granted and musical
education is almost wholly based upon it. None of the changes in the way music
functions now shows through into music education, which still pays homage to the
classical ideal which lies behind the symphony. Virtually no other subject is still
learnt in the home. Talent is usually recognised early on, and instrumental technique
has to be acquired at an age when other children are left free to play. This is partly
because it is believed that physical co-ordination is easier to acquire when hands are
young; but really it is an old-fashioned way of inculcating values through early
exposure—a method no longer current in any other field, except perhaps in orthodox
religion. Music is one of the last forms of education where the training of the memory
is carried out. A young performer has to learn to read the music and simultaneously
translate it into physical actions.
Teaching has to be individual, and works by precept and imitation. It can be
expensive. If a family requires assistance to pay for it, it still seeks it from private
benefactors. The technical studies and little compositions which are used in teaching
music were either written in the 18th and 19th centuries or are based on the style of
that period. The instruments we learn— keyboard, string or wind—more or less
reached their final form at this time. Modifications since, for instance in the system of
wind instruments and valve horns, extend and facilitate the way they are played but
do not fundamentally alter them.
From his first lessons, the pupil’s musical comprehension and taste are formed by the
techniques of performance. Smoothness of passage work, contrast of rhythmic shapes
and characters, and the understanding of phrasing reflect the musical language of
Bach and the Viennese classics.
The urge to compose is, in the first instance, really an urge to imitate. First attempts at
composition relate to what is learnt in instrumental lessons. They generally arise from
creative improvisation—which is believed to have been the basis of all great music.
Improvisation does not mean dreamily following where the fingers fall, but thinking
out a musical idea or phrase, finding appropriate harmony for it, developing it
logically and bringing it to a satisfying conclusion. For the young composer, as for the
great composers of the past, there should not be too great a gap between
improvisation and composition. Tellingly enough, beginners inevitably write in an
18th or 19th century style, although they may hear all kinds of conflicting idioms
around them. The exception to this is in the United States, where many youngsters
now start to learn music on the guitar and imitate rock or jazz before turning, if they
do, to more classical or sophisticated styles.
In the education of young children there need not be any division between performing
and composing. But at more advanced levels, where education begins to reflect the
professional world, the two diverge. Instrumentalists and singers tend to go on much
as before; aspiring composers are soon persuaded by their new teachers that the
values of their former instrumental teachers obstruct the ability to bring genuinely
new work to life. New music involves considerations for which traditional training
does not provide adequate preparation. The instrumental teachers are stuck in the past

3

and are themselves unable to grasp new developments. New methods of training
based on a repertoire of contemporary studies and exercises would give the
performers both technically and aesthetically a better understanding of what goes on
in music now. Bartok’s Mikrokosmos for piano and Kodaly’s educational pieces are
held up as models of how this is to be done. But it is not an easy thing to achieve, and
most attempts at a new curriculum of music designed to acquaint performers with the
techniques of modern music have a watered-down, insubstantial character when
compared with classical educational music.
The trouble is that, whereas the Little Preludes by Bach; the simple compositions of
Rameau, Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven; and even those of lesser composers, reveal
in miniature the same formal integration as the great composers achieved in their
larger works, modern pieces tend to be anecdotal and arbitrary in effect, even when
they deal satisfactorily with a technical problem. Perhaps the failure to succeed with
new music for teaching purposes tells us something about the way in which modern
music depends on elaboration and sophisticated detail. There can be no simplified
versions of modern music, because it does not follow the classical practice of building
great forms out of prototypes.
However much composers may dislike it, musical training has to be based on longestablished materials and methods. There is no classical culture in the world where
this is not the case. If modern music cannot generate its own teaching materials, it
must be because it is not an autonomous culture. To believe otherwise is like thinking
that the possession of a pocket calculator eliminates the need for numeracy. Modern
music is only comprehensible in terms of its past. If the opposite were true and
traditional training were abandoned and replaced by methods and materials based on
some contemporary style, the past would soon become incomprehensible. People
wouldn’t know how to play Mozart any more than they now know how to sing
Machaut. All music would have to be contemporary, putting everybody completely at
the mercy of passing fashions. In our time, only Jiang Qing attempted officially to
dismiss the past, and the little music created in the Cultural Revolution has a servile
and sterile character (quite apart from being not very good).
If musicians continue to be trained more or less as they have been, new music will
always be seen as provocative. And so it should be; its raison d’être rests on its
relationship with the past, however difficult and questioning that relationship may be.
As long as it is clear that contemporary symphonic music is a modernised version of
the past, however improbable this may seem at first hearing, it has a chance of being
accepted into the repertoire in due course.
Inspired by Computers
If the music of today followed past experience, it, too, might gradually find
acceptance. But there is a new factor now. Present-day composers are inspired by the
actual noises that they can produce, whether these emerge from clarinets or
computers, while earlier composers, however radical their thought, by and large wrote
for existing forces. Consequently, the realisation of the latest music frequently
requires resources which are not commonly available. Composers want new concert
halls in order to exploit space in a new way. They still need the sound world of the
orchestra—but require it to be reconstructed and sometimes extended by electronic

4

means. The new requirements can only be met by those radio stations, primarily in
Western Europe, that can finance such costly experiments.
Composers are engaged in sound experiments which no longer combine naturally
with the formal preoccupations found in the symphonic music of the previous
generation, even in Schoenberg, Stravinsky, Bartok and Berg. Closed forms belong to
the convention of the concert hail and are based on the long-range projection of
tension and its resolution. Even when a composer’s material was unfamiliar, form
helped to convey the intention to the audience.
No one can, as yet, say for sure that some of what has been written in recent years will
not, in due course, turn out to have created its own appropriate forms. But form only
clarifies so long as the music can be perceived as an entity, with a beginning, a middle
and an end, and separate from the continuous flow of passing time. John Cage
removed the frame which separates music from everyday life, believing music to be ‘a
game without a goal’. Let sounds be what they are, and not be subjugated to any
intention. Music is a kind of ‘celestial city, which [he suggests] must no longer be
fortified’. Music is everywhere, coming and going— it is not the expression of
individuality, but should bleed into the random sound-world of the environment.
Whether or not he intended it, Cage provides intellectual justification for Muzak.
Cage’s views are the most radical existing negation of musical form, as it is
commonly understood. Few would go the whole way with him. But even more
mainstream composers have been influenced by him. Even if they do not agree with
the radical techniques he devises to avoid intentional musical forms, they have been
infected by his distrust of compositional logic, preferring to allow music to follow its
own course, using a matrix only as a starting-point.
Because so many composers are busy doing something else, there is now a shortage
of major new works for performance by orchestras under the prevailing conditions of
the concert hail. But the international acclaim which greets Shostakovich indicates
that there would be public demand for at least some kinds of new music. This need is
met in part—but not entirely wholeheartedly - by composers such as Messiaen,
Tippett, Dutilleux, Henze and Lutoslawski, who cast their music into forms which can
be reproduced in the same way as the symphonic music of the past.
If little new work is available for the ordinary concert-goer, the capacity for serious
listening turns in on itself. Audiences get out of the habit of opening themselves up to
fresh experience when they are only offered familiar pieces. The principal intellectual
content of concert-going is reduced to comparing different artists’ interpretations of
the classics. Although such comparison requires a considerable degree of knowledge
of the repertoire, it relies on a narrowing down of musical experience and a high
degree of specialisation in one particular aspect of the art.
The exclusive concern with interpretation causes the quite unjustified neglect of light
music. There is a scorn for ‘lollipops’ (perhaps not entirely serious, but nevertheless
enjoyable compositions), which are no longer considered sufficiently interesting to be
heard. Sophisticated and brilliantly composed music by Chabrier, Bizet, Borodin or
Copland—and even the magnificent concert overtures of Mendelssohn and Weber,
which in the past exercised a profound and healthy influence on the development of

5

music—get neglected and may well be forgotten. It’s not at all certain that
concentrating exclusively on blockbuster symphonies and concertos, always earnest in
tone as they are, is necessarily the hallmark of a deep and catholic view of musical
culture. Connoisseurship can actually lead to a narrow-minded refusal to take in fresh
experience.

Where attention is focused on performers as much, if not more than on what they
perform, standards of excellence become all-important at the expense of almost all
other considerations. Critics of the current orchestral scene believe to a man that
progress and the pursuit of technical excellence are synonymous, and would like the
high standard of performance of the world’s great orchestras as heard on records to be
available everywhere. To some degree this has already happened. Ensemble, tuning,
synchronised style and general precision have improved out of all recognition in
recent decades. Players read and absorb information incredibly quickly, and results
are obtained with very limited amounts of rehearsal time. In rehearsals, conductors
talk less of metaphysical matters than they once did, and are expected to be time-andmotion experts, achieving the perfect performance in no time at all.
Nowadays, musicality is often sacrificed for efficiency. The conductor’s aim is speed
and the removal of as many of the hazards and uncertainties of performance as
possible, particularly when a recording is to be made. But efficiency does not
automatically lead to an increased understanding of the music. On the contrary, the
ability to read off the music, which is so convenient in the short run, stands in the way
of less easily definable qualities. There is no doubt that a simplified and positivist
approach to performance produces results on the platform. The job is reduced to
getting the notes right.
Players’ frustrations arise out of having perpetually to repeat the same pieces, and out
of their traditionally ambivalent relationship with the conductor. Conductors
sometimes cramp the very style which they want to obtain. Concern for accuracy,
having to play exactly the same way each time a passage is re-rehearsed, and total
burial within the orchestra, offend against their personalities. An orchestra generates
enormous energy from the interaction of its individual members which, ideally, the
conductor channels. The players want to give of their best and the conductor is there
to pull the strands together. He must resolve difficulties and balance discrepancies.
But he ought not to fear that he will not come across. He expresses himself by the
quality of his gesture which, in the words of Sir Adrian Boult, ‘should not irritate the
players.’ It is not the efficient visiting conductor who gives an orchestra style. Style
results from playing together and listening to each other.
The public can easily be made to feel that the conductor contributes a great deal more
to the performance than the facts warrant. Such importance is attached to the
conductor’s personality nowadays that his proper function as a scholar, or even
modest Kapellmeister, is over-shadowed by his stardom. ‘We are one of the great
orchestras of the world,’ I was told by an American front-desk player, ‘but under
present conditions [pointing to the conductor] we play at about 40 per cent of our true
capability.’ The differences of status between those who appear to be the leaders of
the profession and the highly qualified musicians who make up its bulk become
hopelessly exaggerated—and not only financially.

6

Sapping the Life-Blood of Music
The contrast between the tired and disillusioned condition of the established
orchestral player and the enthusiasm of the musician at the start of his career is
alarming. Anyone who has worked with youth orchestras knows how keen they are.
The best instrumentalists, the most eminent conductors and any composer lucky
enough to be performed by them prefer these young musicians to the most famous
ensembles.
The real triumph of the expansion of musical education is not only in the high
standards achieved by the competition winners from all over the world, but in the
creation of these youth orchestras. The comprehensive schools, large enough to equip
and maintain a full orchestra and provide the instrumental teaching that goes with it,
have, in the few years that they were allowed to flourish, achieved results which are
little short of miraculous. In the old days, when music was a school extra, only the
lucky few learnt an instrument other than the piano; in recent years schools have
produced a fund of players for county and national youth orchestras, which, in their
turn, make up young professional orchestras such as the European Chamber Orchestra
and the Junge Deutsche Philharmonie, based on ideals totally at variance with those in
the professional world.
It’s hard to believe that sacrificing the individual musician’s very love of music must
be the price that has to be paid for superlative performance. It’s more likely that the
aims are wrongly defined. Great interpretations and the memorable events of the
concert hail arise from a combination of circumstances and a collaboration between
all parties who together transcend their natural limitations. It is not only a matter of
star performers. Music comes alive when the artists manage to put over their ideas of
how a piece should go. Barenboim’s series of Mozart Piano Concertos with the
English Chamber Orchestra some 15 years ago; Boulez’s performances of early 20thcentury classics with the BBC; Simon Rattle’s development of Birmingham into a
great orchestra, and the vivacity of some of the Prom seasons planned by William
Glock, were all examples of the way memorable musical experiences could be
achieved under existing, rather than ideal circumstances. Of course, it is extremely
stimulating to hear the noise of virtuoso ensembles like the Chicago Orchestra, the
Berlin or the Vienna. But it is only when the conductor, celebrity or otherwise, can
mobilise the energies of his players and subordinate detail to the imagination that the
sparks really fly. He must retain a sense of his higher calling, and resist manipulating
music for mere spectacular effect.
What ought to be a mutually advantageous relationship between the existing concert
world and the new class of music lovers, fostered by better education, is going to be
dissipated. More and more of this young audience steers clear of the offerings of the
major orchestras and finds its musical entertainments elsewhere. The reason why
young people don’t go to concerts is not just because of ticket prices, it’s because they
are dull, and this despite the fact that the musicians themselves are very good.
Orchestra managers cannot take risks and have to provide what they know will fill the
halls. As choices are eliminated, consumers become even narrower in their tastes.
Finally only a handful of major works will be performed. The choice between
different performances of these few works then depends on little more than the
performer’s reputation. Programming even a short ‘difficult’ or unknown composition

7

halves the audiences. ‘You can lose ten grand with Ligeti in a few hours,’ as one of
our London managers put it. However good the performance, if the composition is
always hackneyed there cannot be much sense of adventure or surprise left.
If concerts are no longer the place where it is possible to pursue a serious interest in
music, the opportunity to become familiar with unusual works exists only on record.
While musical education holds true to the musical traditions of the 18th-century
symphony, the preoccupations of contemporary composers, the ambitions of
conductors and orchestral managers, the boredom of players and, on top of all that,
the reach of the record industry have drunk a good deal of the life-blood of music and
might finish off the rest.

8

