REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 6: The Paradox of Gorbachev's Reforms
TRANSMISSION: 13 December 1988 – Radio 4

In my lectures so far I’ve asserted that a sense of community, in very diverse forms, is
being restored in the Soviet Union and is beginning to make itself felt in the political
system hitherto monopolised by the Communist Party. Having thus, as it were, put the
cart before the horse, I’d like to end where most observers would begin, and examine
how the political leadership sees the situation and what changes it would like to bring
about.
That means looking closely at Mr Gorbachev. He’s established such a position of
dominance, and stamped his personal style so markedly on the current reform
programme, that one is bound to ask how such a man could appear in the midst of
what we are used to regarding as the faceless Communist Party apparatus.
One manifest difference between Gorbachev and his predecessors is that he is
younger and much better educated. He’s more representative of the urban and
sophisticated society that the Soviet Union is becoming. But that alone is not to say
much. It is the kind of education and early experience which is crucial. Gorbachev
comes from the fertile southern region of Stavropol, an area of Cossack traditions and
rich peasant farming, but an area which underwent severe famine after
collectivisation, in fact in the first year or two of the young Mikhail’s life. When he
became First Secretary in Stavropol nearly 40 years later, he devoted a lot of attention
to agriculture, which, as elsewhere in the country, was in a grossly demoralised state.
He even took a correspondence course in agricultural economics. His studies as well
as his direct observations led him courageously to promote an experiment for
motivating collective farmers which was frowned upon in Moscow: the farm labour
force was divided into brigades of 15-30 people; each of them was assigned a fixed
area of land, together with seeds and equipment, and was then paid according to the
results achieved.
Under this régime, wheat output rose 30- 50 per cent over a few years, and Gorbachev
was permitted to continue the practice, even though many Party people worried that
the brigade system meant the beginning of the break-up of the collective farms and a
reversion to private agriculture. The other major component of Gorbachev’s formative
experience was his law course at Moscow University in the early Fifties. In the West,
to say that a budding politician studied law sounds unremarkable. But in fact most
Soviet politicians start their careers with technological studies rounded off by a course
at a Higher Party School. Law has been looked down upon as faintly ‘bourgeois’.
Gorbachev, then, set out in a distinctive way. He will have had to familiarise himself
with Roman law and Western constitutional law, and it’s fair to suppose that this may
have suggested to him a rather different outlook on the problems of Soviet society
from that of his colleagues. This was important to a leader coming to power at a time
when social groups with their own distinct interests and aspirations are beginning to

1

assert them- selves and to interact; for if there is to be peaceful mediation between
them it can only be through the processes of the law.
Gorbachev came to power, though, as the disciple of Andropov, former head of the
KGB, who had sought to combat stagnation not through the rule of law but, on the
contrary, through imposing discipline and eradicating corruption. Gorbachev assumed
his mantle with apparent conviction. He urged workers to higher productivity,
invoking the legendary feats of the Donbass coalminer, Alexei Stakhanov; he
established an official quality-control inspectorate, which was instructed to reject
shoddy manufactured goods and dock the pay of those responsible; he continued and
even stepped up the dismissal and criminal investigation of corrupt officials;
notoriously, he sharply restricted the sale of vodka and banned its use on official
occasions, even for celebrations. Henceforth mineral Water had to be substituted, an
affront to Russian traditions of sociability and hospitality which earned Gorbachev the
none too affectionate nickname of ‘Mineral Secretary’.
This, if you like, was perestroika Mark 1. It was launched with a new and lively style
of presentation, television interviews, question and answer sessions with workers on
the shop floor, during which Gorbachev talked about technological innovation, about
greater openness, or glasnost, about encouraging personal initiative in the economy,
but made very little progress towards these goals.
Then, some time in the summer or autumn of 1986 there was a real change, partly in
words but even more in substance. Perhaps this was a transition to a more radical
transformation which Gorbachev had always intended to carry out; or perhaps it was
the result of learning on the job just how deep the crisis was, and therefore how farreaching were the measures needed to grapple with it. It may even be that the
explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear power station in April 1986 dramatised the defects
of the system, revealing as it did the mortal dangers of handling awesome
technological power with such secretive and slovenly irresponsibility.
However that may be, Gorbachev’s perestroika Mark 2 led him into uncharted
territories, awakening suspicion and resentment among some of those who had helped
him come to power. Above all, it alarmed the medium- and lower-level Party-state
officials, those sufficiently well placed to enjoy a modicum of power, privilege and
the ‘emoluments of office’ under the existing system, but not high enough to realise
or perhaps care about the depth of the crisis. One of the hallmarks of perestroika Mark
2 was making the supervision of these apparatchiks easier by effecting it from below
as well as from above: that is by encouraging ordinary workers to report on the
shortcomings and transgressions of their managers, their trade union officials and
Party secretaries. Stalin had of course encouraged this too, back in the Thirties, but his
chosen vehicle, the anonymous denunciation—the infamous donos which sent so
many innocent men and women to their deaths—was utterly discredited. Instead of
the donos Gorbachev proposed increased openness and democracy: public meetings,
letters (signed) to the press, and the election of responsible officials by their
subordinates.
An intriguing theme began to make an occasional appearance in his speeches at this
time: that the absence of an opposition party obliged officials to be especially
searching in their self-criticism, and to respond with alacrity and probity to criticism

2

from others. In a televised speech at Khabarovsk he warned that ‘officials who react
to criticism by persecuting their critics lay themselves open to criminal prosecution’.
These words enunciated a novel and unwelcome principle: that the law ranks higher
than Party hierarchies. Such a notion would have been execrated as ‘lack of classconsciousness’, by all previous Party leaders, including Lenin. But Gorbachev, I
suggest, was beginning to see how a legal system with real teeth could strengthen
Soviet society.
A Much-Needed Affiance
He was talking now, furthermore, not just of ‘restructuring’, but of a transformation of
social consciousness, of a ‘revolution in the hearts and minds of the people’. This
implied opening up the whole field of culture and education. If he was going to take
on the Party-state apparatus, then he needed an alliance with the cultural and scientific
intelligentsia, whose importance, as we have seen, is out of all proportion to their fastgrowing but still relatively limited numbers. In June 1986 he met a delegation of
writers and appealed to them for help. The people want change, he declared, and the
leadership wants change, but in between stands ‘a managerial stratum, the ministerial
and Party apparatus, which does not want to give up its privileges’.
The writers, despite divisions among themselves, responded to his appeal with their
own brand of public spirit. Their congress spearheaded a public campaign against the
diversion of the northern rivers, they called for the abolition of censorship and they
turned some of their journals into bastions and exemplars of glasnost. Joined by a few
campaigning newspaper editors, film directors and courageous historians, they
published hitherto forbidden authors, and opened up Soviet history once more as a
serious subject of study. Stalin’s crimes were exposed as never before, even in
Khrushchev’s thaw: his vilification and hounding of the opposition, the brutal
collectivisation of agriculture and the consequent famine, the arrests and executions,
the deportations of whole peoples, the costly mistakes in wartime leadership—all
these half-suppressed and wholly suppressed topics were exposed week after week to
a public that seemed insatiable. Nothing could be more revealing about the profundity
of the trauma the Soviet people have undergone than the stunned and fixed attention
they accorded the revelation of 50-year-old crimes.
Nor does glasnost extend only to the past. The media display much greater frankness
and openness on the evils of today, which they present, moreover, not just as
regrettable aberrations, but as failings of the system. The housing shortage, poor work
discipline, shoddy consumer goods and lamentable medical care are expounded and
analysed in vivid detail. Statistics are at last being published on alcoholism, suicide,
disease and mortality. Crucial political decisions are widely and sometimes critically
discussed. There are limits, especially in the treatment of foreign and military policy,
and to some extent of the national problem: reporting from Armenia, for instance, has
recently been restricted and anodyne. At any rate, the last two years have offered the
Soviet public an unprecedented wealth of information and ideas on the state of their
country. And the public has responded, queuing from early morning to buy journals
and newspapers which have acquired a reputation for honesty and liveliness.
Freedom of information is not the only civil liberty advanced by perestroika Mark 2.
The rule of law and the freedom of the individual have become subjects of serious
debate. Now, traditionally the attitude of the Soviet state towards the law has been

3

ambivalent. On the one hand, Marxist theory views the State as the governing
committee of the ruling class and law as an instrument by means of which it maintains
itself in power; this implies that with the overthrow of all ruling classes and the
withering away of the State the law itself is no longer needed. On the other hand, the
Soviet state, having conspicuously not withered away under Stalin, has required a
normative framework for the regulation of society, and especially to direct the
complicated channels of economic planning.
After Stalin’s death the law was called in to perform further functions. The Party
leaders actually had an interest in strengthening legality as a guarantee against the
resumption of arbitrary one-man terror, under which all their heads had been at risk.
They also regarded law as a means of educating people in their social responsibility
and involving them in the process of ‘self-administration’, which theoretically would
eventually become universal and render the State superfluous. At the same time, they
did not want to deprive themselves of the judicial weapons they were accustomed to
rely on for the maintenance of their power. So they formalised and propagandised
what they called ‘socialist legality’, while reserving to themselves the right to bend its
procedures to their own ends. They made no secret of what they were doing; indeed,
in case anyone was in doubt, they specifically rejected the notion of the primacy of
the rule of law, and reasserted the Party’s right to take ultimate decisions.
All the same, preserving juridical decorum created opportunities which, as we have
seen, the dissenters used to project their own concept of legality. When the authorities
arrested them they at least genuinely tried them, however much they distorted court
procedures in order to obtain an acceptable verdict. For their part, the dissenters’ own
behaviour, in calling on the State to observe its own constitution, meant they had
emancipated themselves from the outlook of most Soviet citizens, who helplessly
regard law as something to be manipulated by the authorities for their own purposes.
As the human rights activist Vladimir Bukovsky has remarked, ‘the inspiration of this
idea [was that] it presupposed a small core of freedom in each individual.’
Whether as a result of Soviet legal education, or through Western broadcasting of
information about the dissenters, I would say that the legal consciousness of many
Soviet citizens today—especially educated ones—is higher than we commonly
realise, and certainly as high as among my own colleagues in Britain. I find that
Soviet friends talking among themselves, even casually, take for granted a knowledge
of the constitution, of judicial institutions and of the more frequently applied articles
of the Criminal Code. Of course, some acquaintance with passbook and residence
regulations, or with labour law, is essential just to get by in life, hut in my experience,
nowadays many Soviet citizens are quite searching in their analysis of these
enactments: they feel it’s worthwhile making a fuss if their rights are infringed, and
they know how to go about it. The Soviet people are gradually becoming a nation of
barrack- room lawyers, which is a decided advance on their past juridical ignorance
and apathy. Indeed, this must be one of the most significant social changes which has
taken place in the last generation or so.
Altogether, then, legal awareness is another field in which the political authorities
have been lagging behind social consciousness, and have some catching up to do if
they are to counteract mounting public cynicism. It’s partly a matter of removing
vaguely worded laws which can be brought to bear against people inconvenient to

4

local grandees: the parasite law, for instance, which makes it an offence not to be in
paid employment, and, like the vagrancy laws of Elizabethan England, can be used to
get rid of troublemakers. But partly it’s a matter of ensuring that the courts observe
their own procedures and are independent of political pressure. Some recent articles
by the new breed of Soviet investigative journalist have focused on the phenomenon
of ‘telephone law’, the practice by which Party or Soviet officials ring up the judge
and advise him what the outcome of a particular case should be. Jurists have pondered
how judges can be effectively shielded from this kind of pressure, perhaps by
lengthening their terms of office, perhaps by having them appointed by superior
bodies rather than by the local soviet.
Defence counsels have asked for access to their clients at an earlier stage of criminal
proceedings, at the beginning of the investigation rather than only at the end of it, to
affirm the principle that the accused is presumed innocent until proved guilty and is
therefore entitled to competent advice on how best to present his case.
The 19th Party Conference this summer took up such trivial-looking but actually
rather significant minutiae of the legal process and subsumed them under the heading
of ‘forming the socialist legal state’. ‘The law,’ it declared, ‘is paramount in all
spheres of society’s life.’ And the conference resolution added as a gloss: ‘It is
necessary to give paramount attention to the legal protection of the individual and to
consolidate guarantees of the Soviet people’s political, economic and social rights and
freedoms.’
It’s worth pondering those words a moment. I believe they are historic. If they mean
what they say, they imply that the ultimate goal of the socialist state is no longer the
building of Communism, and that final authority in all questions no longer rests with
the Party. Furthermore, they state that the individual—and by implication therefore no
longer the collective or society as a whole—is the primary focus of the law.
New New Soviet Man
Here the visions of jurists merge with those of writers, scientists, economists, even
religious believers, to produce an image of man very different from the ‘new Soviet
man’ projected in the hitherto prevailing ideology. This is where perestroika Mark 2
breaks totally with perestroika Mark 1 - at least if it’s followed through to its logical
conclusion. For the ‘new new Soviet man’ will in principle enjoy a whole range of
rights and immunities. He or she will have the right to be a free economic agent
within the framework of a family or co-operative business. If he’s employed in the
state sector, he’ll be able to elect his superiors and have the right to be consulted
about their decisions. Laws on cooperatives and on the socialist enterprise already
secure him these benefits. He’ll be able to participate in political life by choosing
between different candidates put forward for local councils; and to exercise this
choice responsibly he’ll have the right to obtain information and openly discuss it
with others. Laws on glasnost and freedom of information are being elaborated to
ensure this. He’ll be able to join with like- minded fellow citizens in voluntary
associations of all kinds, including those designed to agitate for particular political
purposes: for this a law on informal associations is pending.
He’ll enjoy freedom of belief and worship, the right to undertake charitable activity
and perhaps to give religious instruction to his children, depending on the provisions

5

of the law on religious associations currently being drafted. He’ll be free from
arbitrary arrest, his telephone conversations and personal correspondence will be
confidential, his home inviolable.
But wait a moment. None of this is guaranteed yet. Even where new laws have
actually been passed, it remains to be seen how they’ll be operated in practice.
Besides, hanging ominously over all these prospective benefits is the shadow of the
‘leading role of the Party’. Not only has it not been renounced, it was explicitly
confirmed at the recent Party Conference. Will this ultimate prerogative authority be
deployed in such a way as to override the no less roundly asserted primacy of the law?
Here lies the ultimate paradox of the present situation. Leonard Schapiro, one of the
leading Sovietologists of the past generation, used to observe, correctly, that the
totalitarian state was absolutely incompatible with the rule of law and with respect for
personal freedom and morality. Yet here we have a General Secretary of the
Communist Party who has discerned that, without the rule of law and respect for the
individual, his Party will be increasingly out of touch with educated people in the
society it claims to rule. He has recognised that, without the rule of law and respect
for the individual, the whole of Soviet society, including its economic and military
sectors, will continue to decline. The ultimate implication of what Gorbachev is
saying is that, to ensure its own power, the Party must renounce its political
monopoly. No paradox could be more fundamental.
Gorbachev has devised his own solution for bridging the horns of this dilemma. He
wants to upgrade the soviets as a counterweight to the Party—and then head both of
them, as General Secretary of the Party and also President of the Supreme Soviet.
Whereas all his predecessors have been chosen by a few colleagues in smoke-tilled
rooms, when the new voting system is introduced he would become what the Soviet
Union has never had before, a popularly elected leader. Armed with a dual mandate,
from Party and people, he would secure an extra foothold for dealing with those
recalcitrant apparatchiks.
This kind of Bonapartism has obvious dangers. It could easily degenerate into
despotism, or alternatively into a mere façade behind which stagnation would
gradually set in again. But a strong reforming leader of populist inclinations could
well be preferable to the deadening grip of the apparatchiks. After all, Napoleon
Bonaparte introduced the first consistent code of laws in France, one which
acknowledged individual rights and laid the basis for the gradual evolution of
democracy. Besides, authoritarianism which recognises that contradictory and
clashing interests exist, and holds them in check, is much preferable to totalitarianism,
which tries to pretend they don’t exist at all, and smothers them in a blanket of
fraudulent propaganda. Preferable, I mean, in the sense that authoritarianism leaves
open the possibility of evolution into pluralism, as the recent history of Spain has
testified.
Whether Gorbachev will be able to go through with this experiment—indeed, whether
he will still want to once the consequences are clearer—we don’t know. His
opponents are many, powerful and entrenched. He might be overthrown by those
whose peaceful lives his reforming zeal disrupts, proponents not of Brezhnevian
stagnation, but of the rigor and discipline of perestroika Mark 1. Besides, the

6

nationalities issue is very tricky and potentially explosive, and some of the Warsaw
Pact countries, especially Poland, are in an unstable condition. These problems are not
necessarily exacerbated by glasnost, but they are made more conspicuous by it. Under
pressure from them, Gorbachev might feel himself compelled to trim his policies back
to something like perestroika Mark 1. If so, society’s unresolved problems will fester
for a further indefinite period, and the Soviet Union will slip back among the world’s
great powers. Failure of this kind will be obvious, and will mean problems being
swept back under the carpet.
If Gorbachev succeeds, however, his success will be less easy to demonstrate, as his
reform measures will gradually and imperceptibly merge with the turmoil of ordinary
politics. The headlines will be full of troubles in the Baltic and the Caucasus. The
nation of barrack-room lawyers will wake up to its opportunities and claim its rights.
I’m not given to prophecy, but all the same I’m prepared to forecast that the workers
will begin to organise in self-defence against price rises and other consequences of
economic reform. In fact, the politics of material interests will begin to take shape, as
opposed to the clash of ideas which we have seen up to now.
It might not look that way, but that would actually be Gorbachev’s greatest
achievement, to have allowed ordinary politics to arise, to have enabled the Soviet
Union’s political associations and potential pressure groups to interact with one
another, even if still under the Party’s tutelage. This would mean conflict, maybe
violence and a whole new gamut of problems. But the Soviet Union would no longer
be weakened from inside, as it is now, by the decay of a political system purpose-built
for quite different priorities. It would also be much more ready to assume the
responsibilities of a world power, instead of being a perpetual latent threat to its
neighbours, which has been its role in international affairs for decades.
Obstacles to Change
I have argued in these lectures that Soviet society is ready to take up the challenge of
pluralist politics. It can generate the forms of solidarity necessary for political
participation. But in one respect Soviet society itself threatens the reform process. The
economy is not responding at all to Gorbachev’s ministrations. Looking at the bare
shelves of Soviet grocery stores this summer I got the feeling that perestroika is more
evident when I leaf through the newspapers in the reading-room of the School of
Slavonic Studies than it is when I go shopping in Moscow. The Party-state apparatus
still has a stilling hold on the economy, and many ordinary people are apprehensive
about seeing it relaxed, for fear of the free- for-all which might follow. If I’m right in
thinking that the spirit of the village community is not entirely dead, then one of its
most potent legacies is resentment of individuals who go it alone, who better
themselves, even if it’s not at the expense of everyone else. How many times this
summer did I not hear people use the word speculator’ to denote individual traders or
co-operatives providing, at relatively high prices, goods and services which were
obviously needed but which the state sector neglects.
This sullen egalitarianism is especially common in Russia, as distinct from the other
nations—maybe because in Russia the village community was more cohesive than
elsewhere. You may recall the angry Pravda letter writer, Outraged Sverdlovsk,
whose vituperations against maverick behaviour opened my lectures. He has his roots
in the common people, especially perhaps in the Russian people.

7

So traditional forms of solidarity are not all going to help the democratisation process.
Soviet society has its inbuilt defence mechanisms, and sometimes clings to outmoded
and discredited ways—holding on to nurse for fear of something worse, you might
say. This is not surprising: what we are witnessing in the Soviet Union is historically
unprecedented. It is the internal dissolution of a totalitarian system. With the partial
and incomplete exception of Yugoslavia, this has never happened before. It’s true that
the Chinese Communists have loosened their economy, outstripping the Soviets in
this respect, but they have yet to face the political implications of doing so which the
Soviet Union is already beginning to tackle. Since the key lies in politics, the Soviet
experiment is potentially more radical than the Chinese.
In judging the Soviet reforms, then, we lack criteria born of historical experience. Can
a totalitarian system evolve straight towards democracy? It has most of the structures
to do so, since totalitarianism is itself a parody of democracy: it has parliaments, law
courts, mass media, but all performing a ghostly charade, devoid of substance. What
is happening now is that the substance is being restored; the charade is changing into
real politics. But there is no guarantee that the process is irreversible.
Or must the totalitarian system evolve through authoritarianism first? In the Soviet
case, this would mean the ‘leading role of the Party’ providing the framework in
which a limited pluralism might gradually de facto consolidates itself. For what it’s
worth, the Yugoslav model suggests that such an evolution is possible, but that it
tends to get stuck halfway, creating a new round of problems. But then Yugoslavia is
a very different country.
Or is in fact a simple relapse into totalitarianism the most likely outcome? Some
observers certainly think so. A direct return to Brezhnevian stagnation is, I think,
improbable. But even perestroika Mark 1 would mean the same thing in the long run,
a reversion to totalitarian mendacity and inertia, in which the Soviet Union’s steady
slide into decay would be masked only by its formidable military strength. Such a
power would be a surly and unpredictable neighbour, prone to lash out with the armed
forces which are its only glory. Ultimately, too, the problems sidestepped would have
to be tackled, and the social forces I have described would then reassert themselves,
embittered by long delay.
Fundamentally, the Party’s leaders have two options. They can either hang on to their
power at the expense of their country’s standing in the world. Or they can ease their
grip in the hope of maintaining the Soviet Union’s international position. Gorbachev
has made his choice, though no one knows yet whether he’s prepared to live with all
the consequences. Some of his colleagues have not, and they’re hoping the choice
needn’t be made. But, sooner or later, of course it must he. In their own interests, the
Soviet leaders must find the courage to face real politics.

8

