REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 1: A Great Power in a Crisis
TRANSMISSION: 8 November 1988 – Radio 4
In the last year or two, one of the most intriguing sections of any Soviet newspaper
has been the readers’ letters column. Take the following cry of indignation, published
this summer in Pravda: ‘I cannot be silent! Look at what is going on around us. In
Leningrad—the cradle of the revolution—well-fed, insolent thugs parade on the
streets with swastika armbands . . . At an Estonian song contest a half-naked singer
cavorts about with a cross round his neck, and this on television! . . . In Armenia there
are strikes— people skiving without any reason. Where is the law? Why is it silent?
And why are those responsible for law enforcement inactive?’
The writer signs himself ‘member of the Communist Party since 1945, Sverdlovsk’—
very roughly, the Soviet equivalent of Outraged, Tunbridge Wells’. Life has been
very unkind to such staunch party members recently. They’ve seen their own
leadership sponsor changes which affront their most cherished beliefs. Their hero,
Stalin, is pilloried in the press as a mass murderer. State ownership of the means of
production is undermined with impunity, as they see it, by speculators and private
marketeers. Rock music and Western clothing are corrupting the youth. And the party
itself no longer seems to know where it’s going: why, it’s even permitted a self-styled
opposition to come into existence.
While his Tunbridge Wells counterpart works himself up over trivia, Outraged,
Sverdlovsk, has a real point. However blinkered his own approach to it, what he is
witnessing is a real crisis. He may blame Mr Gorbachev for it, but actually it’s rooted
in the very nature of the Soviet system, and Gorbachev has done no more than bring it
to the surface in order to tackle it. Even so, the risks involved in his programme of
radical reform are so serious that one is bound to ask: Why attempt it at all? Why not
just muddle on, as Brezhnev did for 18 years?
Imperial Overstretch
Well, perhaps that is a real option, but muddling on would have consequences which
might not be acceptable to the leaders of a great power. The Soviet Union is in danger
of what the historian Paul Kennedy recently called ‘imperial overstretch’, strategic
commitments so diverse and military power so overgrown that they drain the
resources of the economy on which they depend. The danger has been intensified by
the American Strategic Defence Initiative, which challenges the Soviet Union in
precisely the technological areas where it lags farthest behind. If the Soviet Union is
to remain a great power even in the one sphere where it has hitherto excelled, the
military, it must create an economy which possesses the capacity for independent
technological innovation. This is the heart of the matter as all the Soviet leaders see it,
whatever their shades of difference over perestroika, and that is why they are not
prepared to just muddle on.

1

But behind the economic crisis lies another deeper one, which concerns the whole
society. It was diagnosed already in 1970 by three distinguished Soviet scholars then
in official disfavour: the nuclear physicist Andrei Sakharov, the historian Roy
Medvedev and the mathematician Valentin Turchin. Writing to Brezhnev, they
warned that the economy had entered a stage of ‘dislocation and stagnation’ whose
roots lay in the structure of society itself, in the ‘anti-democratic norms of public life’
established in the Stalin era and never properly dismantled. Without democratisation
and the guarantee of civil liberties, they warned, any purely economic reforms would
fall on stony ground. They proposed political changes remarkably similar to those
which Gorbachev is adopting today: greater openness, or ‘glasnost’, in public life; a
press and information law; increasing the power of the soviets; restoring genuine
elections, with multiple candidacies.
There’s plenty of evidence that Soviet society was ripe for such reform at the time
when Sakharov proposed it. It’s even more so today. The Soviet Union is far from
being the backward, largely peasant country it was even a generation or so ago, when
de-Stalinisation was first begun. Today at least two-thirds of the population lives in
towns. Over the last 30 years there has been a fourfold growth in the proportion of
people with higher education, from just over two per cent in 1959 to nearly nine per
cent now. Occupationally speaking, the fastest-growing sectors of the population have
been the administrative and professional strata which absorb those college graduates.
They’ve expanded sevenfold since 1940, and the growth shows no signs of easing.
Overall, then, even since the last round of serious reforms was attempted under
Khrushchev, the Soviet social structure has become markedly more urban and
professional. Now, on the face of it, a population which in education, lifestyle and
occupation has become so much more like the West should be ready for an open,
democratic style of politics. And indeed, there has been evidence for more than two
decades that society and politics were out of phase with one another, that society was
starting to outgrow the crude and rigid integument of the party-controlled political
system. An unofficial, or ‘black’, economy has been mushrooming to meet the needs
which the cumbersome official-planned economy left unsatisfied. Similarly, extruded
by the narrow confines of official politics, a new kind of semi-underground politics
was taking shape, which we in the West referred to as ‘dissent’. And the dreary output
of official culture was increasingly being challenged by the primitive technology but
lively appeal of ‘samizdat’—self-publishing.
In this sense, we could hypothesise that Gorbachev is doing no more than belatedly
bringing the political system up to date with a more developed society. Or, as one
American observer has put it, that he is not so much impelling change as ‘uncorking’
it.
But it’s not as simple as that. There is no straightforward transition from social to
political change. A sophisticated society is a necessary condition for sophisticated
politics, but it’s by no means a sufficient one.
Totalitarianism
So what stands in the way? The obstacle, as I see it, is the political system handed
down from Stalin, which has proved remarkably tenacious and resistant to change.
This would be obvious enough, were it not that Sovietologists have displayed so much

2

uncertainty about how to describe that system. Thirty years ago, nearly all observers
of the Soviet scene would have agreed in calling it ‘totalitarian’: they’d have pointed
to the monopoly mass party, with its grip on all political and social institutions; the
single dominant leader; the single permissible ideology; the totally controlled culture
and mass media; the completely planned, centrally directed economy; and the
ubiquitous and terroristic security police.
But ever since Khrushchev eased the terror in the late Fifties, there have been
warnings that we were misunderstanding the country, that the term ‘totalitarian’ was a
misnomer, a relic of Stalinism and the Cold War, an obstacle to understanding a
society which was becoming more open, diverse and internally differentiated. What
label might be more appropriate was widely, though inconclusively, debated:
‘modernising’, some thought, or ‘corporatist’ or ‘state socialist’—even ‘pluralist’.
There’s some sense in all of these epithets, except the last, ‘pluralist’, which is
precisely what the Soviet system is not. But none of them has ever replaced the
totalitarian model as an instrument for enabling us to see the Soviet system as a
whole. None of them defines the essence of the system as opposed to characterising
certain of its aspects. The danger of partial labels is that they can mislead us into
seeing in Soviet society superficial analogies with Western institutions, precisely
because we lose sight of the overall context.
So I make no apologies for resurrecting the notion of ‘totalitarianism’. I believe it
enables us to understand both why radical reform has become so urgently necessary,
and also why it is proving so difficult to carry out. Remove the term ‘totalitarian’, and
it is not obvious how the Soviet Union differs from, say, Spain under Franco or Chile
under Pinochet. But these differences are crucial.
A Nation Traumatised
The first and perhaps most important feature of totalitarianism is that it has produced
a nation traumatised by its own past. It’s difficult for us to grasp the sheer scale of the
human suffering involved, but we know that, according to recent Soviet estimates, the
mass collectivisation of agriculture in the Thirties subjected ten to 15 million peasants
to forcible expropriation and deportation. We know that a substantial proportion died,
many of them in the ensuing famine. Moreover, from about the mid-Thirties to the
mid-Fifties, millions of Soviet citizens were in slave labour camps, where the death
rate was at least ten per cent a year. Some historians believe the victims of Stalin’s
brutality may have outnumbered the 20 million usually cited by Soviet sources as the
figure for those killed in the Second World War.
And this is not to mention the tens of millions uprooted from their homes by less
abnormal social processes, like industrialisation and military service. When Boris
Pasternak wrote his Essay in Autobiography, he broke off before this period with the
words: ‘To continue would be immeasurably difficult. . . One would have to write in
such a way as to make the hair stand on end and the heart falter.’
I myself have found over the years that, as I get to know Soviet citizens of the middle
and older generations, I discover that all of them have been scarred in one way or
another by that terrible epoch. One will remember being deported in a cattle truck to
Siberia; another that, when she was six, her father simply disappeared and was never
heard of again; another recalls standing with his mother in long queues outside

3

prisons, waiting to deliver food parcels and hoping for a scrap of information about
his father. Those who were in labour camps and came out alive are usually very
reluctant to talk about the experience, perhaps agreeing with Varlam Shalamov,
survivor of Kolyma, that ‘the camps were a negative school of life in every respect. . .
There was much there that no man should know or see, or if he has seen it—it is
better he should die.’
Shalamov, fortunately, did not follow his own precept: he chronicled his labour-camp
experience in a series of gritty, icily factual stories. The Soviet people are similarly
ambivalent but, on the whole, have preferred not to dwell too much on the grim past.
When a nation cannot face its own past, it will have difficulty with its future too. We
have seen something of this in German society since the war, but the effect is far
deeper in the Soviet Union. There the regime responsible for the trauma is still in
place and till very recently it had only feebly and indecisively denounced its own
crimes. A whole nation has been unable to mourn its murdered and tormented. This
theme of the belated and halting recovery of memory is one to which I shall return,
for it underlies much else.
The Nomenklatura System
Another crucial feature which distinguishes the totalitarian régime from the merely
authoritarian: it has created its own society. Whereas Franco and Pinochet (and
arguably even Hitler) inherited social structures from the past and sought, by and
large, to preserve them, the Communist Party began its rule by destroying an old
society and creating a new one in its own image. The new ruling class was delineated
by the nomenklatura system, through which the Central Committee controls
appointments to all responsible posts in society. All other social classes—and for that
matter, nationalities—fell into place in a hierarchical pyramid whose framework the
party constructed. True, with time, these raw social classes gradually acquired their
own way of life, their traditions and customs, but the party was integrally woven into
these as the guiding and directing institution.
That basic fact governs the next major distinct characteristic of the totalitarian system:
its unique pervasiveness. The Communist Party not only leads and guides society, it
penetrates it. It has its cells in every factory, farm, office, school and block of flats. It
unceasingly supervises, indoctrinates, exhorts, and mobilises—not always
successfully, it’s true, but its presence is invariably evident. Through the
nomenkiatura network, it has a grip on patronage in every social hierarchy. It watches
over the economy and sorts out the muddles and bottlenecks which inevitably arise
when the planning system gets tangled in its own tentacles. It socialises the people
through the education system. It speaks to the people through the mass media. It
preaches to the people through its propagandists and agitators. It both claims and
exercises an exclusive right to all these forms of authority, a prerogative bestowed
upon it by history, of which its guardians profess a superior understanding.
Ideological ‘Static’
Since this right to rule rests on ideology, it follows that totalitarianism is a system
which attributes paramount importance to ideas. The ideas may be debased, but
they’re everywhere. Every student, whatever his subject of study, has to pass
examinations in Political Economy, Dialectical Materialism, Scientific Atheism, and
the like. The acquaintances of my student days at Moscow University used to say they

4

were bored silly by these subjects: they would knit or write letters during the lectures,
and then desperately mug the material up out of a textbook the night before the exam.
One might think that studies pursued in this way could hardly have a profound effect.
But actually, I sense that the impact of all this ideological cramming is not altogether
superficial. Rote-learning has a way of clinging to odd corners of the mind, and
turning up unexpectedly, maybe years later. In any case, the effect is constantly being
reinforced by the ever-present slogans on street banners, wall-posters, in newspapers,
and on radio and television. As the émigré novelist Alexander Zinoviev puts it, Soviet
citizens are ‘in constant contact with the powerful magnetic field of ideological
influence . . . They absorb from it a certain electrical charge . . . There is physically no
way they can escape from it.’
This, of course, is especially true for the literate, for those who live in towns, and
those who perform administrative or intellectual work; that is, the fastest-growing
sector of the population.
This all-pervading ideological ‘static’ does not necessarily make everyone a MarxistLeninist zombie. Far from it. But it does inculcate in the average Soviet citizen the
habit of systematic, monological thinking on social, political and philosophical issues,
an inclination which remains with him even if he disavows the official ideology. The
instinct for seeing problems as a whole, and taking up vehement, unambiguous
stances on them has permeated the gradual revival of civic consciousness in the
Soviet Union, as we shall see.
Another paradoxical fruit of the ascendancy of ideology is that it confers high social
status on people whose profession is ideas. In the West such people often have to seek
niches in jobs where ideas are a by-product. In the Soviet Union, by contrast, they can
work in the party’s huge ideological apparatus of instructors, propagandists and
agitators. They can go to ground in one of the many research institutes maintained by
the party, the government or the Academy of Sciences, none of which ever sees
anything so demanding as a student. They can join one of the creative unions, such as
the Union of Writers, which exist to free authors from the necessity to support
themselves by mercenary drudgery (ironically, many of them in consequence produce
their own species of dreary hack-work, but then that itself is a tribute to the respect
accorded even to derivative ideas.)
In short, there exists in Soviet society a certain confidence that ideas, especially allembracing, systematic ideas, are worthy of respect as such and require no extrinsic
justification. Given the normal human propensity to discern charm in forbidden fruit,
this confidence bestows on alternative, non- Marxist intellectual systems a
considerable creative, or should one say subversive, potential.
Last among the key distinctive features of the totalitarian society is the unusual depth
of the divide it opens up in the individual between the public and the private persona.
To some extent we are all familiar with this divide. No one in any society behaves
towards his employer exactly as he would with a close friend. But nowhere is the split
so radical as it is under totalitarian rule. Most people, whatever their private views,
cultivate in public a façade of conformity and anonymity: they do what is expected of
them. ‘A meeting,’ in the definition coined by the satirical novelist Vladimir

5

Voinovich, ‘is an occasion when people gather together, some to say what they do not
think, and others not to say what they really do.’
This institutionally induced schizophrenia engenders what appears on the surface to
be an almost limitless flexibility of outlook. People’s opinions change, or seem to,
with the same abruptness as the party line. How many unexpected ‘liberals’ did the
advent of glasnost not suddenly reveal! Editors and critics who had not stinted in their
paeans to what later became known as ‘the era of stagnation’ were transformed
overnight into convinced exponents of perestroika. Which of the two they really
believe remains an enigma. We should not take too seriously, then, what passes in the
Soviet media for ‘public opinion’.
As against the impressive but brittle unanimity of public life, Soviet citizens cultivate
their private pursuits and attachments with an intensity seldom seen in more relaxed
societies. Behind the carefully contrived façade of anonymity and conformity, they
discreetly ‘do their own thing’ in the company of like-minded individuals. That
‘thing’ can vary from rock music to abstract art to the discussion of Hegelian
philosophy to Yogic meditation. What such groups have in common is that they are
dealing in cultural artefacts and ideas. Many of them have turned, naturally enough to
their own semi-suppressed national traditions, Russian or non-Russian. As an
occasional privileged interloper in such gatherings over the last quarter of a century, I
can testi1i to their remarkable warmth, humanity and spiritual intensity. This is the
milieu in which the political anecdote flourishes— that back-handed tribute of
oppressed intellectuals to the rulers who subjugate them. It’s also a milieu in which
the exchange and exploration of ideas proceeds with utter spontaneity and at the same
time concentration. In my experience, the art of conversation is pursued in Moscow at
a higher level than anywhere else in the world.
Until recently, one could say that this intellectual ferment produced little discernible
social result. It remained perforce essentially private. It’s true that the movement
called ‘dissent’ grew out of it. ‘Dissidents’ were people of this kind, forced to ‘go
public’ because the state had invaded their private domain, charging them and their
colleagues with ‘anti-Soviet propaganda’ for circulating among themselves thoughts
not admitted to the official canon. Nearly all Westerners misinterpreted dissent: in a
classical example of the failure to see the whole Soviet context, they took it for a
political movement aiming to bring about political change, and accordingly judged it
a failure. Actually it was the mere dislocated tip of an iceberg, whose depths
harboured a powerful reaffirmation of personal identity and community—a spiritual
not a political movement. Judged in its own terms it was not a failure but a
remarkable success, and ultimately it has brought forth political fruits as well, in the
diverse and beneficial flowering which has taken place under the official policy of
glasnost.
Elements of pluralism do emerge, then, at least potentially, under the totalitarian
carapace. But they’re very different from the competing interest groups with which
we are familiar in Western societies. They’re formed on the basis not of material
interests, but of culture and ideas, in keeping with the society to which they belong.
They don’t compete in an open forum for media attention or for influence on the
electoral process. On the contrary, until recently, they have deliberately shunned all
publicity, seeking it, if at all, only when the state violates their fragile boundaries. The

6

Soviet Union has been a deeply segmented society, in which a multitude of diverse
associations existed, but did not interact with one another. Nowadays they’re just
beginning to, generating the ‘turmoil’ which is normal politics, but which so
disconcerts Mr Gorbachev’s colleagues.
All of which brings me back to Outraged, Sverdlovsk. The crisis he’s witnessing is
the crisis of Soviet totalitarianism. The system is undermining itself through its own
inherent contradictions, putting at risk the great power status which it once achieved.
From the leadership’s viewpoint, the totalitarian pathology is most evident and
damaging in the economy. Controlled as it is by party and state officials who
constitute a self-perpetuating ruling class, and whose original mission was to impose
cruder priorities for a simpler society, the Soviet economy is incapable of responding
to the much more discriminating demands of today’s customers. It is in effect a huge
institutionalised sellers’ market, run for the benefit of those who operate it, not of
those who have to use its products. It actually penalises both innovation and highquality work, the driving forces which are needed to ensure the Soviet Union the
economic base of a 21st-century great power.
The ‘Second Economy’
The resulting milieu of low pay and permanent under-production is the familiar home
of the great majority of Soviet citizens— those, that is, who don’t have access to
privileges assigned from above. Prices of housing, transport and basic foodstuffs are
relatively low, and the authorities prefer to keep them that way. When Khrushchev
raised meat prices in the early Sixties, there was rioting in the streets, and the leaders
are regularly reminded by developments in neighbouring Poland how defiant workers
can become when asked to pay more for their food. To fulfil this side of their tacit
social contract with the workforce, the Soviet state pays out the equivalent of some
$50 billion a year in subsidies.
Of course, cheap commodities in short supply have to be rationed somehow, and in
the Soviet Union they are rationed by the queue. Most Soviet citizens expect to spend
part of the day standing in line along with hundreds of their surly, frustrated fellow
citizens. They tend, indeed, to regard the right to do this during working-hours as
another aspect of that tacit ‘social contract’: ‘They pretend to pay us, and we pretend
to work.’ In order to keep the queuing down to a minimum, however, most of them
also devise at least some private arrangements, through bribery, or personal
acquaintance, or mutual favours, to obtain the supplies or services of which they have
most regular need. Thus a shop assistant may keep back a good cut of meat in return
for a tip, or a garage mechanic may perform motor repairs for imported clothing. The
permutations are endless, but they nearly always involve time, tools or goods diverted
from the official economy. The ‘second economy’ is essential to a tolerable life, hut
it’s also parasitic on the official one and therefore dependent upon it. Its devices are
precarious, and both seller and customer have an interest in their remaining
undisturbed.
This situation gives most Soviet citizens a certain stake in the status quo. They cannot
afford to have their private arrangements disrupted unless successful reform of the
entire economy follows, so that goods and services hitherto obtainable only
clandestinely become regularly available at affordable prices. Much of the unease

7

provoked by Gorbachev’s measures derives from the fear that in his drive against
corruption he will upset existing contrivances without putting stable patterns of
supply in their place.
It isn’t, therefore, only the élite, the nomenkiatura, who have an interest in the
prevailing system. To some extent most people have become dependent on it, or have
at least sought out a tolerable niche within it which is inevitably vulnerable to the
winds of perestroika.
Yet the system inspires only a limited and conditional loyalty. For in other ways it
engenders evils which people are well aware of and find extremely irksome, even
oppressive. The general squalor and neglect, the confined intellectual life, the cultural
censorship, the religious restrictions, the obstacles to foreign travel, the bureaucratic
obstructionism, the degradation of the environment: all these deficiencies are
perceived by most Soviet citizens as products of the system and as serious
impediments to what they nostalgically like to call ‘normal life’. And that includes a
lot of members of the élite. To eliminate these evils, or even some of them, most
people would be prepared, in my experience, to support an out-and-out reformer, if
only they could be sure that their present precarious sufficiency would not be
destroyed without anything more lasting and satisfactory being substituted. For that
reason, the natural reaction to a reforming leader is initial caution, even inert
resistance. But this could give way to enthusiastic support if he is seen to be
succeeding. In most people’s eyes, however, Gorbachev has not yet made the vital
breakthrough. This is one major source of his difficulties.
Apparatchiks’ Fears
Another is that his reform programme entails a crucial paradox. A serious loosening
of the economy, let alone of politics and intellectual life, would dislocate the
mainspring of the power which the Communist Party’s full-time officials, the
apparatchiks, have arrogated to themselves. They are well aware of the fact. To be fair
to them, some party secretaries also recognise the seriousness of the present crisis,
and the need for drastic remedies, at least to judge by their speeches at the recent
party conference. But the bulk of the medium and lower-level apparatchiks, who are
perhaps less well in- formed and certainly have narrower perspectives, are resentful at
any prospect of losing their grip on power and privilege. And they can still claim the
mandate of history in support of their prejudices.
So do the reformers stand a chance, or are their efforts doomed to failure? To a
considerable extent, the answer depends not on them, but on the response of Soviet
society. We in the West tend to write Russians off as passive, even slavish, and to
assume that, because they have no native tradition of democracy, they are incapable
of ever creating a more open and pluralist policy.
There is, of course, something in this: Russians do not have a heritage of democracy
as we understand that term. All the same, I don’t believe they are condemned to
eternal civic passivity.
In future lectures I shall be suggesting that, from their past, they do have traditions of
political participation and mutual solidarity under pressure which could be decisive

8

elements in the new situation, and which could help to create the makings of a civil
society.

9

