REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 4: The Flawed Melting Pot
TRANSMISSION: 29 November 1988 – Radio 4

The national question in the Soviet Union provides a striking illustration of
Tocqueville’s celebrated dictum that ‘the most dangerous moment for a bad
government is when it seeks to mend its ways’. Although the various Soviet nations
often resent having their lives controlled from a distant and unresponsive Moscow,
one would have said until very recently that there was no way they could seriously
challenge their rulers, simply because they did not have any effective autonomous
organisations of their own.
Today the picture is quite different. The factors which have given birth to informal
associations in Russia make themselves felt, with redoubled intensity, in the nonRussian areas. There, issues of history, culture and the environment are even more
salient as symbols of national distinctiveness, and for the same reason writers and
scholars enjoy a uniquely respected status. The whole dynamic of glasnost and
democratisation has propelled ethnic factors to the centre of the Soviet political stage.
Glasnost did not, however, actually create this situation. It has merely made it
manifest. The Soviet multinational state is the last of the great European empires; and
since the others have all fallen apart in the present century, it’s to be expected that the
Soviet one, too, should come under pressure from national liberation movements. But,
viewed in that perspective, the Soviet Union is a decidedly unusual imperial entity. It
resembles the Habsburg or Ottoman Empires, contiguous agglomerations of territory
held together by military and administrative power. Yet, more than either of those, it’s
numerically and politically dominated by one nation, the Russians. But—and here the
paradoxes begin—that domination has not enabled the Russians to flourish
economically, even by comparison with many of their ostensible ‘colonies’:
compare, for example, the poverty of a village in Central Russia with the relative
prosperity of its counterpart in Estonia or Georgia. Nor have the languages and
cultures of the principal non-Russian peoples withered: in fact, in some ways they’ve
developed and strengthened as a result of membership of the Soviet Union.
The truth is that this is not in the normal sense a Russian empire. It’s a Communist
one, perhaps the first empire in history to be ruled over by a political party. From that
fact flow the anomalies and contradictions of this unprecedented multinational union.
The anomalies result from the unintended as well as the intended effects of the
Bolshevik revolution. To take the intended effects first. Lenin held that classes, not
nations, were the fundamental social formations. Ultimately, he believed, nations
would wither away along with states, and the proletariat would create an international
community of peoples. In the short and medium term, however, he recognised that the
national sentiment of imperial Russia’s subject peoples was a very useful ally in the
struggle against the tsarist régime, and later in the civil war against the White armies.

1

So before and during the revolution itself the Bolsheviks launched the slogan of
‘national self-determination’, supporting the emancipation of the subject peoples from
Russia. In the immediate sense, the slogan was a great success: most of the peoples
did ally themselves with the Reds and did proclaim their independence, at least
temporarily.
Once the Bolsheviks themselves were the masters, however, they inevitably took a
much dimmer view of separatism, not only because they were the party in power, but
also because theoretically they regarded ‘national self-determination’ as subordinate
to the ultimate goal of ‘proletarian internationalism’. Between 1918 and 1921 the
Reds gradually and, where necessary forcibly, resumed control of most of the old
imperial territories. So, when the Soviet Union as a political entity was finally formed,
it might have seemed that the way was open for ‘proletarian internationalism’. But
actually, of course, the Soviet government was not in a position to offer the nonRussians any kind of internationalism, proletarian or otherwise. The most it could
extend to them was membership in a multinational polity dominated demographically,
linguistically and administratively by Russians. And this in turn could easily seem
like Russification, the very evil against which the non-Russians had so recently
fought, with Bolshevik support.
Lenin himself was well aware of the danger. In the last years of his life he repeatedly
warned of crude Russian chauvinism making its reappearance in the leather-jacketed
breast of the Soviet commissar. He did not, though, propose a political solution to the
problem: his preferred remedy, as we shall see in a moment, was cultural and
linguistic. The Soviet Union was nominally designated a federal state, and its
constituent republics theoretically enjoyed considerable autonomy—even the right of
secession. But in practice its administrative structure was highly centralised, with not
only diplomatic and military, but also economic power firmly located in Moscow. The
Russian Republic, nominally just one of seven republics in the Union, in fact
contained 90 per cent of its territory and 72 per cent of its population. It could
scarcely avoid becoming its dominant member. Add to this that the Communist Party
did not even pretend to federalism: Lenin always intended that power should reside
unambiguously with the All-Union Central Committee in Moscow. The national
Communist Parties of the constituent republics were, and have remained, no more
than subordinate provincial units.
Alongside this formidable concentration of political and economic power there did,
however, emerge a genuinely decentralised and pluralist approach to culture. There
were good reasons for this. Lenin had al ways believed that the political revolution
needed to be complemented by a ‘cultural’ one. He felt especially strongly about this
when he surveyed the abject and desperate state of the country after the civil war. The
Communists might be in power, but they were not really running the country, because
the ordinary people and the medium- and lower-level officials lacked basic work
habits and elementary notions of punctuality, probity, even literacy. Lenin hoped to
overcome this handicap by a huge programme of cultural propaganda, beginning with
the inculcation of elementary literacy.
It made little sense to conduct such a programme other than through the native
languages of Soviet Russia’s numerous peoples. Like the medieval Catholic Church
facing rural paganism, the Party had to show some consideration for inherited popular

2

traditions. The 1920s and early Thirties thus saw the introduction of universal primary
education in the various native languages, as well as the publication of books, journals
and newspapers in the vernacular. In some cases this meant the transformation of
what had been largely peasant or tribal dialects into full-scale literary languages. In
others it meant the revival of ancient cultures threatened with eclipse by the growing
dominance of Russian.
It’s important to remember that not all ethnic communities automatically survive into
the modern world and become full nations. For every potential nation which makes it
to nationhood there are a far greater number which fall by the wayside. Many dialects
and folklores gradually fade away, or at least remain behind in the rural ghetto when
their bearers come to the city and are swamped by a broader, more sophisticated
culture. This was a fate which might reasonably have been expected to overtake the
Ukrainian and Belorussian peoples in the early 20th century. But Soviet nationality
policy unintentionally ensured that this did not happen. If most Ukrainians coming
into the towns during the five-year plans had been illiterate, then they would probably
have acquired the habit of using Russian as an everyday language and would in effect
have assimilated to Russian culture. Soviet education policy, however, ensured that
they were mostly literate, and in Ukrainian. As a result, the towns become more
Ukrainian during industrialisation. In 1926, 65 per cent of Ukrainian town-dwellers
named Ukrainian as their native language, but in 1959, the next time the question was
asked in a census, that 65 per cent had grown to 77. In Belorussia the effect was even
more marked.

This movement of an ethnically-aware rural population into the cities helped to lay
the social base for the intensely nationally- conscious intelligentsia of today. The
effect was reinforced by the elaborate administrative divisions of the Soviet Union,
which gave even quite small ethnic groups their own miniature version of statehood in
the form of an Autonomous Republic or an Autonomous Region. It was Party policy
that all such subdivisions should have their own indigenous cadres, local nationals
promoted up the nomenklatura ladder to hold high office in their own territory.
These people were and are tightly supervised by Moscow’s representatives in the
Party and the KGB, but they none the less symbolically embody the attributes of
nationhood and have sometimes been able to act as power-brokers on behalf of their
ethnic colleagues.
Stalin, it’s true, tried to re-establish a centralised Soviet hegemony with marked
Russian nationalist overtones. He purged those indigenous cadres, accusing them of
‘bourgeois nationalism’. He insisted on a Russian imperialist version of history being
taught in schools, and he was in the habit of referring to Russians as ‘elder brothers’
in the Soviet family. Worse than that, he tried to destroy some nations completely, by
uprooting them and deporting them to distant and unfamiliar territories: or if they
were too large, then he deported or murdered their elites, as he did in the Baltic,
Belorussia and Ukraine in 1939-41. Yet never did he end the practice of conducting
primary education in local languages, so that the nourishing of national feeling from
below continued unbroken throughout his rule, irritated and intensified by his
repressions and by the crude mixture of Marxism and Russian chauvinism which he
imposed as cultural pap. Moreover, for reasons of his own, when he introduced
passbooks, which all Soviet citizens had to carry, he included in them the category

3

‘nationality’. A citizen’s ethnic background thus became a permanent administrative
fact, which would affect his fate every time he applied for education, a job or a
residence permit. So whatever the official rhetoric about the ultimate merging of
nationalities, their separate existence was authoritatively registered, with far-reaching
consequences for everyday life.
All in all, the contradictions of Soviet policy have set the agenda for the conspicuous
national revival which is going on today, with the encouragement of glasnost.
Given what I said in my last lecture about the emergence of informal groups in
Russia, it’s not surprising that non-Russian national grievances are usually formulated
first of all y writers and scholars, who are in a better position than most of their
countrymen both to identify potential dangers and to articulate alarm at them.
Whereas in the Sixties and Seventies such dissent did not often spread beyond limited
circles, because the authorities used an array of sanctions to keep it within bounds, in
the last couple of years, various concerns, different in each nation, have sparked off
contact between these circles and a broader public.
The most basic concerns of all are territorial. They gave rise to mass movements even
before the days of glasnost. It’s easy to understand why: a nation without a homeland
is deprived of the most elementary condition of community life. Already in the
Sixties, the Crimean Tartars, deported from their native soil by Stalin and forbidden to
return by his successors, were able to mobilise most of their co-nationals for a mass
campaign of demonstrations and petitions. The Jews are in an analogous condition:
without a proper homeland in the Soviet Union, they saw an alternative one
established in Israel in 1948. Feeling discriminated against in jobs, housing and
education, they encapsulated their national aspirations hi the demand for the right to
emigrate, a desire little understood by other Soviet nations and easily dismissed as
mere lack of patriotism.
Armenian Agitation
The territorial issue which has most recently attracted the headlines is the Armenian
demand to have the Autonomous Region of Nagornyi Karabakh incorporated into
their republic. This is one of those emotionally overburdened problems whose
implications are very difficult for outsiders to appreciate. The Armenians are an
ancient people, the oldest continuous Christian culture in the world, with much more
than a mere millennium to celebrate. But for them territory and statehood have always
been sensitive issues, since for many centuries their population was mostly uprooted
and scattered between different empires. This has made them vulnerable to intercommunal violence, of which the Ottoman massacres of 1915 were only the worst
example.
That’s why Stalin’s decision in 1923 to include Karabakh in the Azerbaijani Republic,
with its Turkic and Muslim population, has always offended Armenians. The region
was at that time more than 90 per cent Armenian in population, and the subjection to
an alien race reminded them forcibly of the orphaned and vulnerable condition in
which their people have so often lived. At the same time their loyalty to the Soviet
state—which after all has remained their protector against hostile neighbours— has
inhibited them over the years from serious agitation to put the anomaly right. Even
today their behaviour has been restrained: they know that their unrest endangers

4

Gorbachev’s perestroika, which is their own best hope for a tolerable existence in
future.
What’s remarkable about the recent Armenian agitation is that the local Communist
Party has actually espoused the demands of its own people. Discredited by decades of
corruption and meek subjection to Moscow, it’s no longer able to exercise its
traditional authority. This has been temporarily usurped by a so-called Karabakh
Committee, headed by writers, journalists and scholars as well as officials acting in a
private capacity. The committee has organised itself with branches in factories,
offices and educational establishments—just like the Party itself—and seems to have
resisted all efforts to disband it. Nor could the Party play its usual mediating role
between Moscow and the locals. That role had to be taken over by two writers, who
went to see Gorbachev in March at the height of the first round of troubles, both to
communicate to him personally the intensity of Armenian feeling and to bring back
his assurance that there would be a ‘new beginning in Karabakh’. The head of the
Armenian Church, Catholicos Vazgen, has also helped to fill the vacuum, supporting
the claim to Karabakh, but urging his countrymen to pursue it by peaceful and legal
methods.
The national question, then, has the potentiality to shake established power structures,
and substitute, at least for a time, new forms of solidarity.
In other parts of the Union ecological issues have been to the fore in arousing public
concern. In Georgia, for example, the project of building a railway through the centre
of the Caucasus mountain range has drawn forth protests from writers and scholars
which have aroused a lively public response. The railway would invade a remote
mountain valley which supplies most of the water drunk in Tbilisi, the Georgian
capital. Protesters claim that it would threaten not only historical monuments and tree
cover, but the very health of the inhabitants of the city.
Similarly, in the Baltic, recent unrest was initially sparked off by protests over
ecologically dubious schemes, the open-cast mining of phosphorite in Estonia, the
building of a hydroelectric dam in Latvia. One indignant Latvian wrote a letter to his
local paper asking ‘Have those who sit in various Moscow planning institutes ever
been to the places they so nonchalantly propose to bury?’ He was speaking for the
helpless rage of millions at their subjection to economic decisions taken far away and
in complete ignorance of local conditions or feelings.
Nazi-Soviet Pact
The most emotional issue of all, however, has probably been history. The British find
this obsession with the past difficult to appreciate, though if you come from Ireland
you’ll probably be more sympathetic. But for the Baltic peoples, knowing exactly
what was agreed in the Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939, or how their nations became
constituent republics of the Soviet Union in 1940 is far from idle antiquarianism. It
affects their understanding of themselves and their place in the world right now.
Hence their demands for publication of the secret protocols of the Pact, and for a
memorial to Stalin’s victims. It’s a natural extension of these demands when
organisations like the Estonian People’s Front in Support of Perestroika put forward a
programme which includes economic self-rule for Estonia, recognising Estonian as
the official language of the republic, and restricting immigration of outsiders. Such is

5

the consensus in the Baltic about demands of this nature that, first of all, the official
cultural unions, and then the national Communist Parties themselves, have sponsored
them, partly in order to head off even more radical aims, like a separate Estonian
army or even national independence.
For similar reasons Ukrainians have developed what outsiders can too easily dismiss
as a fetish about the ‘blank spots’ of their history, and especially the famine of 19324. In intensified form this famine is the same trauma which has afflicted Russians:
the brutal destruction of the ancient peasant community in collectivisation, aggravated
by loss of life on a huge scale. The truth about this horrifying massacre has been
purposely concealed and, apart from the fact of its having taken place, what interests
Ukrainians most of all is whether the famine was deliberately imposed on Ukraine in
order to weaken demographically Russia’s largest neighbour and rival.
An evening of testimony and discussion on the famine was arranged this spring by the
Ukrainian Culturological Club, an informal association which has existed for over a
year now, in spite of harassment by the authorities. I had the chance to talk to some of
their leaders in April, and felt immediately both the intensity of their concern for a
vulnerable ethnic heritage, and also the state of siege in which they live, quite
different from the relative openness of Moscow and reminiscent of the Brezhnev era.
Symptomatically, Shcherbitskii, First Secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party, is
one of the last survivors of what they call the ‘era of stagnation’ still holding high
office. As a current wry joke has it in Kiev: ‘Want a rest from perestroika? Then come
to Ukraine.’
There are cogent reasons for this anomaly. Ukraine has always occupied a peculiar
place in the constellation of Soviet nations. Whereas all the others, apart from
Belorussia, are in some sense peripheral’, Ukraine is ‘central’. Without it something is
torn from the very heart of the Soviet Union.
This is partly a matter of strategic situation, on the high road into Central Europe and
the Balkans. It’s also the vital industrial and agricultural wealth of Ukraine. Perhaps
most of all it is demographic: without the 42 million Ukrainians, and the nine million
Belorussians, the Russians themselves make up only half of the Soviet population.
But add in the Ukrainians and Belorussians—and they are ethnically closely related—
then the Russians are easily the dominant nation, demographically as well as
politically.
Ukraine is thus the key to the Soviet Union’s national problem. That’s why Soviet
leaders tend to be nervous and rigid in their treatment of it. Life would be much easier
for them if the Ukrainians would just quietly allow themselves to be assimilated into
the Russian nation. In some ways things are moving in that direction. After the rapid
Ukrainianisation of the Twenties and Fifties, there has been some falling back since.
This reverse was precipitated by an educational reform of 1958, which made it no
longer compulsory to teach a child’s native language as a school subject. Russian, by
contrast, remained compulsory throughout the Union. This measure was especially
damaging to the Ukrainian and Belorussian languages, since, given the choice, many
parents prefer to send their children to Russian schools, where they will learn to speak
and think in the lingua franca of the empire, and so acquire better prospects for higher
education and employment. The result is that the number of Belorussian and

6

Ukrainian-language schools has declined sharply, in Belorussia almost to extinction
point in the towns, while in Kiev, capital of Ukraine, only 12 per cent of schools are
Ukrainian today.
The Ukrainian Writers’ Union has taken a public stance on this question. Last year the
writer Dmytro Pavlychko warned that if things went on as at present the Ukrainian
language ‘would probably survive only in Canada’, and he called for a law making
the study of the native language, literature and history compulsory within the republic.
Ukraine is not the Baltic, however, and the Communist Party has offered no support
whatever for this campaign. Writers to whom I spoke earlier this year feel bitterly that
their own political leaders are letting them down. Ukraine stands, in fact, as a last
monument to the now largely abandoned goal of merging the Soviet nations and
creating ‘proletarian internationalism’.
One nation in the Soviet confraternity is in a very singular position, and that’s the
Russians. To all appearance they are the imperial nation, the ‘elder brother’, in
Stalin’s words. They have no worries about their territory, or their language, or alien
immigration: in fact, other nations feel threatened by them. Yet, curiously enough, in
some respects the Russians feel like a national minority discriminated against in their
own country. They know that the non- Russians are often more prosperous. And they
can see that since 1917 their Church has been undermined, their rural way of life
mortally enfeebled, their writers and artists banned, driven into the underground and
emigration.
As an imperial nation, the Russians, like the English, tend to invest their ethnic
consciousness in the state structures they have created. But what happens when those
structures turn round and victimise them? Who are they to blame for that? Actually it
was the Soviet state, especially but not only in its Stalinist guise, which inflicted these
injuries, but not all Russians have the detachment to appreciate that fact. And since
there is no ethnic ‘elder brother’ to reproach, it comes easier to heap imprecations on
the Communist Party’s traditional targets, on international imperialism and on
unspecified ‘rootless cosmopolitans’, which usually means the Jews.
In the last couple of years an informal association has arisen to articulate these
sentiments. Known as Pamyat—Memory, it originated, like its counterparts among
the non-Russians, as an action group of those concerned about the protection of the
environment and historical monuments. It’s clearly become something more than
that— although I have to say that, since the Soviet media publish only fragmentary
and derogatory material on Pamyat, we’ve got very little reliable information about it.
However, one or two of its manifestos have found their way to the West, and they
enable us, I think, to characterise it as being an outgrowth of popular Stalinism, of the
period after the Second World War, when official anti-imperialism, Russian
chauvinism and anti-Semitism were at their height. The heart of the message is that
‘international imperialism, nourished by Zionism and by its servile, mercenary lackey,
Freemasonry, is attempting to plunge the world into the vortex of a new global
catastrophe.’ Pamyat exhorts the Soviet peoples to resist this threat by uniting round
‘true leaders’, and commends the Central Committee of the Communist Party headed
by M.S. Gorbachev.

7

This expression of loyalism cannot altogether conceal the proto-fascist world view
which underlies the manifesto. Flow far such sentiments are shared by the rank and
file of Pamyat—indeed how many members there are and who they are—is
impossible to say. The Soviet press claims that there is a healthy mass membership
led by irresponsible demagogues. There may be something in this, but since the
organisation is so oriented towards strong leadership, its ordinary members cannot
easily be dissociated from the fascist principle proclaimed by its leaders. Pamyat
could cause serious trouble in an area like the Baltic, where the locals are increasingly
resentful of outsiders: the Russians there could easily become the Ulster Unionists of
Soviet politics.
The situation is complicated by the fact that ever since the Thirties the Soviet
Communist Party has sometimes made use of Russian nationalism as an auxiliary
ideological force with more mass appeal than Marxism. In the turmoil generated by
perestroika it may be tempted to do so again now, and to conclude some kind of tacit
alliance with Pamyat. The trouble is Russian nationalism is not just equivalent to the
other nationalisms of the Union. Russians often ask me ‘Why shouldn’t we be entitled
to our own patriotism, like any other nation?’ The answer is that Russia is so large
and so dominant that Russian patriotism as a political force would unbalance the
whole structure of the Soviet Union: it would split the Communist Party into its
national components, something which is already beginning to happen, as we’ve seen,
in the Caucasus and the Baltic.
The fact is—and Soviet leaders must face it squarely—the national question could
break the Soviet Union. After all, it has broken all the other empires of the 20th
century. Why should the Soviet Union be an exception?
Well, I think the strength of the armed forces and the security police gives it quite a
good chance of being an exception. But all the same, if the Soviet leaders don’t
handle national aspirations with exemplary tact, then the only way they’ll be able to
hold the whole explosive mixture together is by combining super-Brezhnevian
corruption with military and police coercion on a scale which would distract the
Soviet Union from its strategic commitments. That would be expensive, demoralising
and internationally enfeebling.
The alternative is to convert the Soviet Union into a genuine federation. That’s what it
already is on paper, so it will only be necessary to breathe authentic life into
institutions which already exist in suspended animation. I say ‘only’, but of course the
task will be fraught with difficulty, especially since it will entail federalising and
democratising the Communist Party. Otherwise the national republics will never be
able genuinely to determine their own economic, educational, and other policies.
However, Gorbachev is already moving in this direction, democratising local Party
organisations, reforming the Soviets so that they can exercise real responsibility. Nor
would he actually be risking very much in conceding greater powers to the national
republics: the armed forces and the KGB remain, as I say, quite strong enough in a
territorially unified commonwealth to cope with most conceivable conflicts. And
conflicts there would certainly be, as the example of Yugoslavia suggests. But
federalisation would reflect the emerging pluralism of politics and would release

8

creative energies which could enhance the wealth, strength and international standing
of the Soviet Union.

9

