REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 5: Religion and the Atheist State
TRANSMISSION: 6 December 1988 – Radio 4

As I was leaving Tbilisi, capital of Soviet Georgia, at the end of April, I witnessed
from the taxi an extraordinary event. On the Mekheti Church, high up on the crags
which overlook the River Kura, two men were clambering over the roof, using an
arrangement of ropes and pulleys to haul a golden cross on to the pinnacle. Inside, a
service of dedication was being held: a church which had not seen divine worship for
nearly 70 years was being returned to the faithful.
The day before, in Moscow, Gorbachev had received Patriarch Pimen and five senior
bishops. ‘Believers,’ he told them, ‘are Soviet working people and patriots, and they
have every right to express their convictions in a fitting manner.’ This uncharacteristic
statement was just the prelude to a series of festive occasions by which the leaders of
State and Church celebrated a millennium of Christianity. One of the high points was
the restoration to the Church of the Kiev Monastery of the Caves, on the site where
the first baptism of the Russian peoples was reputed to have taken place 1,000 years
before.
It’s not just the happy chance of the calendar which has brought Church and State
together. Many of the social problems Gorbachev is tackling today—corruption,
alcoholism, slovenly work discipline, unstable family life—are moral rather than
political in character. They have not responded to repeated campaigns of ideological
exhortation mounted by the Party’s zealots. On the other hand, many of the country’s
best writers have been saying for years, even in the teeth of the censorship, that
religious faith was a potential antidote to demoralisation. The Party seems to have
decided in the end, doubtless reluctantly, that it might as well enlist the help of the
established Churches. In any case, why alienate millions of believers—perhaps a third
of the population—who would mostly be loyal and patriotic citizens were it not for
the Party’s customary disdain for them?
The Party, in short, is looking to the Churches as a source of social solidarity which
by itself it is poorly equipped to inspire. The Orthodox Church, which has long
regarded sobornost—the spirit of community—as its distinctive strength, ought to be
ideally fitted to supply this deficiency. The trouble is that the Church itself has been
seriously, perhaps fatally, weakened by the Party’s own past treatment of it. Decades
of active persecution alternating with contemptuous manipulation have left it not only
numerically reduced but spiritually debilitated to the extent where it may no longer be
able to play the role the Party now envisages for it.
The heritage of bad, at times murderous, Church-State relations is a grievous one.
From the very beginning, the Soviet state expropriated the Church, and declared the
clergy more or less outcasts. The Law on Religious Associations limited worship
strictly to designated churches and prayer houses. It forbade Sunday schools or any

1

form of religious instruction, pastoral visits, or charitable work. In other words, the
State tacitly outlawed any religious activity other than the performance of divine
service. Normal parish life was rendered impossible, and religion became, as one
might say, a matter for consenting adults in private. Those provisions have remained
in force to the present day.
Survival at any Price
The Orthodox Church eventually accepted this situation, though not without
damaging internal rifts. In 1927 Metropolitan Sergii, locum tenens for the vacant
Patriarchate, proclaimed: ‘We wish to be Orthodox believers, arid at the same time to
acknowledge the Soviet Union as our civil motherland, whose joys and successes are
our joys and successes, and whose misfortunes are our misfortunes.’ Asked privately
how he could accept such a humiliating predicament, he replied: ‘we must preserve
the Church for the people: after that, the Lord will show us what we must do.’
Survival at any price has become paramount in the Russian Orthodox Church. The
caution derives not just from difficult relations with the State, but also from the
uncertain allegiance of the faithful. Russia’s elites and intellectuals have a long
history of heresy and unbelief. As for ordinary people, the Church was worried long
before the revolution that they would fall prey to the rich variety of Nonconformist
sects, or indeed to the other religions which perforce coexisted in the multinational
Russian Empire: Catholicism, Lutheranism, Judaism, and Islam. Against this
background, and with the added threat of the militantly atheist Communist Party,
simply keeping the Church in being was a daunting challenge, and doubtless it was in
that spirit that Sergii made his gesture of reconciliation.
Unfortunately, though, his declaration of loyalty to the Soviet state induced no
reciprocal concessions. The 1930s were the grimmest period the Churches—and not
just the Orthodox Church—had ever experienced. The collectivisation of agriculture
often meant the closure of the village church, and sometimes its physical destruction,
though more usually it would he turned into a storehouse or club room. Priests were
arrested and sent to labour camps or driven into exile along with the kulaks. Of more
than 50,000 churches open before the revolution, only some 4,000 remained by 1939.
Of 163 bishops, only 12 at most were still at liberty.
At that juncture, in spite of all its concessions to a brazen atheist state, the very
survival of the Orthodox Church was in doubt. Yet Stalin never completed its
destruction. In 1939, when the Soviet Union annexed what had formerly been Eastern
Poland, he decided that the Church could be useful in helping to assimilate the
region’s largely Ukrainian and Belorussian population. And in 1943, when he was
beginning to envisage taking control of Eastern Europe, Stalin received Metropolitan
Sergii in audience (the only such occasion in Soviet history till Gorbachev repeated it
this year) and he allowed the Church to re-establish an ecclesiastical administration,
to publish a journal, to reopen some of its parishes and to resume training recruits for
the priesthood. Thereafter—and right up to the present—the Orthodox Church has
been a useful ally of the Soviet state in its diplomatic relations throughout the world,
and especially in the international peace movement.
At a certain stage, then, the Soviet leaders decided that the Church would be more
useful to them alive than dead, or perhaps I should say open than clandestine. That
was a fateful decision, and maybe in a sense it justified Sergii’s act of submission. In

2

spite of renewed persecution by Khrushchev in the Sixties, under which about half the
existing parishes were closed down, the Church has survived as a recognisable entity
to the present more favourable juncture, when the Soviet intelligentsia is displaying
renewed interest in religion and the State seems inclined to make concessions.
Cost of Survival
On the other hand, that survival has been secured at a very high price. Enfeebled by
subservience to an atheist state, the Church is no longer well fitted to act as vehicle
for the religious revival or to promote social solidarity. New converts feel acutely the
absence of any normal parish life. As a lay Soviet believer commented a few years
ago: ‘In the church there is almost no Christian interpersonal sociability, no activity in
fulfilment of the Second Commandment. How many lonely old people are too weak
to leave their homes for bread or medicine, but the people with whom they have
prayed together for years don’t even know of their plight?’ If this is so, then the
Church is not fulfilling the very ideal of sobornost—the spirit of congregation—
which it used to claim as its distinctive strength.
Besides, the system of ecclesiastical appointment ensures that priests and bishops are
chosen, as far as possible, for their deference to the Party. Patronage is ultimately in
the hands of the Communist Party Central Committee, like all other serious personnel
questions in the Soviet Union. It’s delegated through a state committee called the
Council for Religious Affairs, which reports regularly on the comportment of every
priest and bishop. A few years ago the text of one of these confidential reports
reached the West. It divided bishops into three categories, according to the degree of
their compliance with Party policy.
The first, most favoured category, consists of those who ‘realistically understand that
our state is not interested in proclaiming the role of…the church in society and
accordingly do not display any particular zeal in extending the influence of Orthodoxy
among the population’. Less favoured is a second category: bishops who correctly
observe the law on cults, but nevertheless ‘stand for the heightening of the role of the
church in personal, family and public life’, who ‘select for priestly office . . . zealous
adherents of Orthodox piety’. Third and last, the Council deplores those bishops who
‘have made attempts to evade the law on cults’ and who slander the Council’s
commissioners. Presumably, this implies they’ve been quietly sanctioning
unauthorised Sunday schools or something of that nature and concealing the fact from
the authorities.
This report prompts mixed reflections. On the one hand, any appointments system
adopting these criteria is likely to produce a submissive Church hierarchy. On the
other hand, I am intrigued by the intermediate category—the largest numerically. It
suggests a substantial contingent of bishops who, under the mask of outward
conformity, are discreetly doing what they can to extend the Church’s influence and
to pre par for its future. One is reminded that, even in the most abject times, the
Orthodox Church has remained a source of spiritual strength for many people, partly
through its liturgy, partly through the ascetic, contemplative tradition of its elders and
holy men, whose effect on believers derived not least from the fact that they had no
institutional place in the Church, but acted by virtue of their personal charisma. Father
Zosima, in Dostoevsky’s Brothers Karamazov, was based on a real-life model of this
kind. Today the monastic heritage has been almost completely destroyed, but there is

3

still fitful evidence that a few such holy men have helped to keep alive the faith
through the recent bleak decades.
Peasant Faith
Because of its enserfed position, the Russian Orthodox Church has had little
opportunity to adjust to the huge social changes of the 20th century. It remains
essentially the same Church which used to tend an overwhelmingly peasant
congregation. Now, the faith of peasants was very different from that of the
contemporary urban intellectual. The Russian peasant’s religion was a largely
illiterate one—a rustic faith based on the liturgy and ikons. It followed the rhythms of
the agricultural cycle, and it was interwoven with a rich overlay of pagan elements,
especially those associated with the peasant hut and the ancestors.
In the early 20th century ecclesiastical reformers did try to modernise the liturgy,
improve religious education, encourage a livelier parish life and break down the social
divisions within the Church. But the tsarist régime resisted them and then—even more
lethal—the Bolshevik one favoured them; laying reformers open to the charge of
serving as the agents of atheism, splitting and undermining the Church from within.
The Orthodox Church has never forgotten the experience and has drawn from it the
lesson that reform is divisive and therefore mortally dangerous to a Church under
siege.
Today, however, the old peasant faith is more or less dead—its passing mourned in
Valentin Rasputin’s magnificent novel, Farewell to Matyora, published in 1976. The
educated young people of the modern city are seeking something very different: a
highly literate faith, based on a knowledge of the Bible and the church fathers, of
ecclesiastical history and theology, a faith capable of holding its own in the
intellectual contest with Marxism and other secular philosophies. Soviet intellectuals,
I think, are peculiarly prone to the religious urge. After all, they have been brought up
to an ideology which demanded submergence of the ego in the collective for the sake
of an exalted aim, the building of an earthly paradise. Not only have they thoroughly
imbibed the catechisms of that doctrine, but they have participated in public rituals
designed to consolidate it, and they have made their obeisance’s to its ikons.
Communism has never been a religion in the full sense of the word, but it has adopted
many of the outward appurtenances of one. When its conviction fades, therefore, as it
certainly has in the Soviet Union, it is natural that many of its adherents should seek a
genuine religion to put in its place.
They come, moreover, from a faith whose teachings are expounded in a
comprehensive and reasoned manner. They will expect a Church to present its
doctrines no less convincingly. This is where the Russian Orthodox Church often fails
to live up to their expectations.
Some have dealt with this vacuum in their own way, by setting up study groups and
seminars, putting together small libraries of religious works, which are otherwise so
difficult to obtain in the Soviet Union. They hold regular meetings to exchange ideas
or even simple information. This is the kruzhok again—the cohesive little circle which
is the natural habitat of the Russian intelligentsia—and it not only fills the intellectual
deficiency, but also compensates for the absence of a proper congregational life
within the Church. One such kruzhok was established in Moscow in 1974 by a cinema

4

student, Alexander Ogorodnikov. He brought together friends who had grown up in
atheist families and had then gone through a complex, sometimes agonising process
of spiritual questing. ‘From Marxist convictions, via nihilism and the complete
rejection of any ideology,’ Ogorodnikov later recalled, ‘via attraction to the “hippy”
lifestyle, we came to the Church.’ Even there, they found no secure haven, partly
because of what they called their ‘pagan intellectual pride’, but partly because of the
‘lack of a flourishing community life within the Orthodox Church.’ As Ogorodnikov
said, ‘Our thirst for spiritual communion, religious education and missionary service
runs up against all the might of the State’s repressive machinery.’
The seminar met irregularly, with a fluctuating membership whose only qualification
was readiness to join in what under Soviet conditions was a hazardous enterprise, but
it recreated for some of its members the sobornost—that spirit of community—which
they felt they had not found in the Church itself. ‘We loved that little flat,’ one of its
members has testified, ‘for the spirit of freedom which filled it... Those conversations,
that way of life, took hold of me completely: it was all…so full of meaning and depth,
so full of the warmth and genuine feeling which you cannot confuse with anything
else; it was so different from vulgar Soviet life...’
Well, ‘vulgar Soviet life’ supervened. Members of the seminar were searched,
interrogated and harassed. Ogorodnikov was deprived of his residence permit for
Moscow, then arrested for ‘parasitism’ and sent to a labour camp. Other members
were charged with disseminating the journal which they had started to bring out. The
Soviet state in the late Seventies was not prepared to tolerate this kind of religious
seeking.
The Church hierarchy is vulnerable to the charge that it hasn’t done enough to
intercede for young people like these endeavouring to take up a Christian way of life.
When I asked Metropolitan Filaret, a senior bishop, about them a few years ago, he
replied that, since they have never entered the Church, he could do nothing for them.
Besides, he added, they criticise irresponsibly, bringing conflict and disharmony into
our Church and sowing hatred where there should be love. The leaders of State and
Party are our flock, and for the sake of the Russian people as a whole we should
approach them in a spirit of dialogue, not one of rejection.
Fair enough, if the State had not taken the lead in sowing the disharmony. But
Filaret’s attitude also reveals a very understandable aspiration: the desire to play once
again a full role in society, to be part of the Russian people, coexisting in dialogue
with a ruling party which has a very different philosophy. If Church legislation
currently being discussed is passed, this may again be possible: parish life could be
re-established, charitable activity resumed, even perhaps some degree of religious
instruction legalised.
We do not yet know if this will be the case. But the man in charge of the Church’s
side of the discussions, Archbishop Kirill of Smolensk, gave a lecture in London
earlier this year. In it he acknowledged that the Church had not been able to play its
proper role in Soviet society. Much of the task of transmitting the Christian
spirituality of the past had, he pointed out, been accomplished by writers, even by
writers who were not themselves believers, but who derived their inspiration from
Russia’s cultural heritage. Now, he said, the priority of ‘universal values’—non-

5

political values, in other words—was at last recognised once again by the political
leadership, and therewith the Church faced the opportunity and the challenge of
resuming its proper role. Whether it would respond successfully to this challenge he
left an open question. And so would I. It remains to be seen whether enough of the
Church’s underlying spiritual strength has survived to enable it to make that response.
Baptists
If the Orthodox Church is not in a fit condition to receive the questing young people
of today, then it has a formidable rival among Christian denominations. The fastest
growing Church in the Soviet period has been the Union of Evangelical Christians
and Baptists, formed during the war under state supervision to bring together a variety
of Protestant sects.
The reason for its relative success is partly that, like the Nonconformist chapels of
Victorian Britain, it has filled the gaps left by the official Church in the cheerless new
industrial towns. Where the Orthodox Church has been forbidden to build, the more
informal congregations of the Baptists have inconspicuously taken root, using
temporary prayer houses, or even each other’s apartments. Their presbyters are mostly
unpaid, with full-time jobs in the secular world, and they devote their spare time to
pastoral work. They are overworked but flexible, able to adapt readily to Soviet life.
Perhaps most important of all, the Baptists offer a warm and supportive community,
which, by all accounts, rallies round its own needy members, helping the old and sick,
giving relief and sometimes financial aid to one-parent families. This may be why
they were the first to practise a form of social solidarity later adopted by secular
dissenters. In 1964 they set up a Council of Prisoners’ Relatives, to obtain data about
Baptists imprisoned for their faith, to collect funds for their aid, and to write appeals
to the authorities.
In a sense the Baptists practise what the Communists preach. They live lives of hard
work, sobriety, moderate asceticism and mutual aid; they are patriotic and lawabiding. Theirs is also a religion of the literate, in which sermons and the study of the
Scriptures occupy a paramount place, and it’s natural that it should attract so many
people in a society which has been moving fast towards universal literacy. All the
same, some elements of their faith are in direct tension with the atheist state. Close
study of the Scriptures is difficult to keep up when the authorities permit very few
Bibles to be printed. The Baptist ideal of the autonomy of each congregation and the
separation of Church and State is incompatible with strict official supervision of the
Churches. Above all, the duty to evangelise, to bring up children in the faith and to
convert unbelievers runs directly counter to the Party’s religious policy.
Disagreement over how to react to this incompatibility has split the Baptists. Whereas
the leadership of the Baptist Union has taken the line that they must preach the gospel
only within permitted limits, some congregations have denounced this policy as
‘rendering unto Caesar that which is God’s’, and have insisted on their right and duty
to bring children to services, and to seek converts in the world. These
Nonconformists, calling themselves Initsiativniki, or reform Baptists, suffered heavily
from persecution during the Khrushchev and Brezhnev periods. In 1966 they managed
to organise the first unofficial public demonstration to be seen in the Soviet Union for
40 years, when 500 delegates came from 130 cities to present a petition to Brezhnev.

6

Not being received, they sat in the courtyard of the Supreme Soviet’s Presidium, and
eventually had to be bodily carried away, singing hymns, by the police.
So the Baptists have been a major force. They don’t on the whole attract intellectuals,
for their theology is unsophisticated, but they’ve done much to provide for the
religious aspirations of workers and employees, especially those recently uprooted
from a traditional rural way of life. With perhaps a million and a half members,
they’re not all that numerous, but they’re still growing, and they have been political
innovators, offering an example of solidarity under pressure from which others have
learnt. Their conflicts with the authorities show how a religious movement with an
effective community spirit can make life difficult for an unreconstructed atheist state.
If the Orthodox Church disappoints the Party’s hopes through insufficient sobornost,
the Baptists may embarrass them through excess of it.
Islam
Although Islam springs from a very different origin, it does in some ways resemble
the Evangelical faith: it’s fiercely committed and egalitarian, but also flexible, able to
accommodate itself to Soviet life. In the early years of the Soviet régime Islam and
Communism had much in common: a commitment to equality, the brotherhood of
nations and the struggle against Western imperialism. But the temporary alliance
between them soon split apart: the atheism of Moscow fitted ill with the fervent
theism of Islam and Asiatic ties pulled Muslims away from the orbit of European
Russia.
We know relatively little about Islam in the Soviet Union today. Few Sovietologists
command the necessary languages, and we receive scant information from the
relevant geographical areas. Except among the Crimean Tartars, there appears to be
little or no dissent as we understand that term. What evidence we have suggests that,
instead, Muslims quietly distance themselves from the Soviet mainstream, discreetly
maintaining their traditional way of life in its essentials, while conceding inessentials
to secular society. People stay in villages and small towns, with their social round
centred on the tea-house, their religious life on the mosque or Sufi brotherhood, rather
than move into the large cities with their more anonymous lifestyle. One consequence
of this tendency is that the birth rate remains much higher than in European parts of
the Soviet Union. Large families are the norm, encouraged by both religion and
custom, and the Muslim peoples, already at least a sixth of the Soviet population, are
steadily increasing their share. But they are too attached to their homeland to move to
European Russia or Siberia to fill the labour shortages there.
Soviet Muslims tend, then, to be strongly rooted in their homelands. They accept what
socialist society has to offer them: broader education, relative prosperity and greater
freedom for women, while at the same time they adapt their religious practices to the
demands of the externally imposed production schedule. There is not, in any case, the
sharp distinction between the sacred and the profane in Islam that we are used to in
Christianity. To say ‘I am a Muslim’ is more to acknowledge membership of a
specific community or to deny being European than it is to assert a conscious
confessional choice. In other words, it may be an ethnic as much as a religious
statement. This means that custom and worship can mingle in a relatively relaxed
manner. If a month’s fasting at Ramadan is too demanding for a Soviet production
worker who must keep up his bodily strength, then it can legitimately be curtailed to

7

as little as three days. Or the requirement to pray five times a day prostrated in the
direction of Mecca can be modified to one or two times in a posture more suited to the
layout of office or factory floor. In general, the customs which have survived best are
those connected with family and community life, such as circumcision, marriage and
burial, rather than with religion per se.
It’s important to remember, though, that beyond official Islam, sanctioned by the
Soviet state, lies the forbidden milieu of the Sufi brotherhoods. Descendants of the
holy orders which headed the resistance to Russian colonisation in the 19th century,
they preserve the Islamic faith in its purest, most uncompromising form. By their very
nature we know little about the brotherhoods, but it seems certain that they are
abiding sources of unofficial education, spiritual guidance and cultural transmission in
a society torn between the sacred and the secular.
Some scholars would maintain that a Muslim explosion is imminent. It’s true; there
have been isolated outbursts in recent years, but not quite the sustained unrest one
might have expected following the Iranian revolution and the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan. What little evidence we have seems to me to suggest a pliant and
flexible, but self-respecting, network of ethnic communities unostentatiously
preserving and extending what they can of their heritage. This quiet build-up could
lead to serious trouble one day, but all we are justified in diagnosing at the moment is
a gradual and persistent reassertion of traditional cultural and religious patterns.
Altogether, what we see in the manifold religious denominations of the Soviet Union
is a discreet but determined revival of inherited faiths and traditional community life,
altered but not rendered unrecognisable by the pressures of modern society.
The Party welcomes the strengthening of social solidarity, but may find the
accompanying ideological outlook hard to swallow. Some of the Churches which
have best sustained their community life are the national ones, in Georgia, Armenia
and the Baltic republics, for example. Their ethnic aspirations, though peacefully
expressed, could intensify the conflict between nationalities which is already such a
headache for the authorities. In one remarkable case, the Ukrainian Catholic Church is
actually banned, but has flourished underground because it offers Ukrainians a way of
celebrating their faith in their own language and of marking their alienation from a
Russian dominated atheist system.
So seeking an alliance with the Churches is a promising but high-risk policy. The
Soviet Union is already a much more ‘religious’ country than Britain or most of
Western Europe, not least because of the Utopian aspirations embedded in its official
ideology. On top of this, the current religious revival has all the elemental force of the
‘return of the repressed’. The Party’s new allies may restore a lost sense of
community and improve the morale of Soviet society, but they are likely also to
intensify its suppressed divisions. The Churches bid fair, moreover, to rival the Party
on its own ground of socialisation and ideological indoctrination. All this will enliven
Soviet politics and make it more honest, but it may give the Party a bumpy ride. As a
Russian proverb has it, ‘Two bears in the same den will never agree.’

8

