REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 2: The Return of the Repressed
TRANSMISSION: 15 November 1988 – Radio 4

Visiting the Soviet Union today, one is tempted to believe that Russia’s past has
disappeared entirely. Standing in a modern Soviet street, I sometimes feel as if I were
in a society afflicted by communal amnesia, disoriented like an alcoholic who wakes
to discover he can’t remember what happened the day before. The town may be old,
but it now bears a brand-new name, that of some Soviet hero, and the gigantic
architectural monoliths in which most Soviet citizens live have obliterated all traces of
previous settlement. It does not seem possible in the Soviet tabula rosa that any form
of social institution or even memory can have survived revolutions, wars, purges and
forced industrialisation to offer a foothold for a more pluralist mode of politics today.
Yet, if the Soviet Union is to evolve from totalitarianism towards democracy, then it
needs a reliable memory. In politics the past is never irrelevant, for it contains the
habits and tendencies which will continue to affect the future. It also harbours the
missed opportunities, the embryonic forms which failed to develop to maturity. A
people which values its autonomy will periodically pause to reconsider them, in order
to gain a more secure grip on the forces which determine its future.
At the start of my career I studied one of Russia’s undeveloped embryos, the State
Duma, which was the short-lived prerevolutionary parliament. The Duma had serious
powers, it contained a variety of political parties, and it debated the issues of the day
in an unconstrained and well- informed manner. At its birth the British House of
Commons sent it a telegram welcoming it to the international family of parliaments.
Perhaps there, I thought, I might find a thread from the past, the first rudiments of a
democratic tradition. But I soon discovered that today’s Soviet intellectuals, even
those with a concern for freedom, are not reading the ideas of Milyukov or Guchkov,
who were the two leading liberal members of that assembly.
While I was in Moscow, though, I did discover something else, something which
pointed at least to an inherited sense of community. Take the following scene, which I
believe will be familiar to most people who have spent some time in the Soviet Union.
You have been invited to a friend’s home one evening. You want to take a little
present, so you trudge round the shops looking for something—a box of chocolates,
flowers, even just some decent sausage meat. But the shelves are empty and the
salesgirls sullenly unhelpful. Tired and discouraged, you struggle on to a crowded bus
where all the other passengers have oversized elbows and feet. Getting off again, you
tramp through the freezing air, and make your way into the filthy, evil-smelling
vestibule of a block of flats.
Then you ring at the doorbell—and a magical transformation takes place. Your
friends welcome you. Whether or not you have managed to bring a contribution,
you’re seated in front of a feast which may be modest but must have taken hours of

1

ingenuity to assemble. The vodka—or in the Gorbachev era, the tea—begins to
circulate. You plunge into discussion of literature, philosophy, science, politics—
everything under the sun. You feel for a while—and is it an illusion?—that you’re
part of a warm community talking about the things which really matter in life.
This, I believe, is the archetypal Russian experience, and it goes back centuries: a
freezing climate, squalid externals, a harsh and inadequate official system contrasting
with a warm interior, a humane and cultured personal life. This duality is a perennial
feature of Russian history, and the current tentative revival of politics derives its
characteristics from the ingrained habits it has engendered.
The institution which probably did most, historically speaking, to form the Russian
approach to politics was the peasant community, which survived for centuries in a
setting where the climate was harsh, the soil poor, and the government demanding. It
rested on sturdy self-reliance, collective decision-making, mutual aid and the sharing
of burdens; it also exercised communal supervision over each of its members, for
departures from the norm, in agriculture or in personal behaviour, were seen as a
danger to everyone. The Russian peasant community in no way resembled Western
democratic institutions. It was, in fact, a kind of patriarchal democracy, where
decisions were taken in common, but then authoritatively imposed.
The memory of this social unit runs deep, and it tells us much about Russian
behaviour at critical moments. It was decisive in the revolution of 1917, when over
large areas of the country the village communal assemblies coordinated the seizure of
land and its subsequent redistribution. Moreover, the assemblies, or soviets, of
workers’ deputies, which took power in the towns, were hastily improvised on
principles the workers were used to from their village background. Accustomed to
self-reliance, mutual solidarity and collective decision- making, workers were able to
cope successfully with the crises of 1917, and in doing so they created the institution
which still gives the Soviet Union its name.
The Communist Party sponsored and led this revolution of workers’ and peasant
communities, but it later also destroyed them, partly during the civil war, partly a
decade later in the whirlwind collectivisation of agriculture. The soviets of town and
countryside became merely instruments of one-party domination. Yet, curiously
enough, I have the impression that the spirit of peasant community survived in
distorted form in the dwelling patterns of the city, in the so-called ‘communal
apartments’, where for decades families lived squeezed next to one another m the
desperate housing shortage. There, in shared poverty, they have perforce to devise a
consensus about the common use of kitchens and bathrooms; and they kept an even
closer eye on each other than was possible in the village. Even today, when communal
apartments are no longer universal, the basic unit of Soviet urban life, the large block
of flats grouped round a courtyard, still has something rural about it. The men sit at
tables and play cards or dominoes, the women gather and gossip, the children play in
the sandpits. Such scenes can be found in Moscow as much as in smaller towns, and
are very different from the texture of urban life in most of Europe.
The Kruzhok
A more recent tradition, perhaps more relevant today than that of the peasant
community, was also shaped in the dual Russian mould of harsh externals and a warm

2

interior. In the 19th century, Russia’s intellectuals tended to band together in small
groups for self-protection. Their basic social unit was the kruzhok, a small circle of
devotees who would meet, discuss, carry on impassioned arguments on philosophy or
politics late into the night. Hermetic and secretive because of the oppressive political
atmosphere of tsarist Russia, these circles were warm and supportive internally, but
chronically suspicious of outsiders, especially neighbouring circles with rival
programmes. They admitted new members by using their instinctive moral sense.
Pavel Annenkov, the chronicler of their first generation in the 1840s, characterised the
kruzkok as an ‘order of knighthood’ where ‘any sign of a morally doubtful sentiment...
was detected at once…and provoked merciless attack’.
Originally the intelligentsia circles derived their attitudes from German idealist
philosophy, which they latched on to with a fervour that doubtless owed something to
the abject condition of the Russian Orthodox Church at the time. They then fitted
socialism into this framework, and in effect channelled their religious aspirations into
a programme of secular utopianism, promising social revolution as the means of
man’s final deliverance from evil. Deprived of religion in the ecclesiastical sense,
they worshipped instead literature and science. Literature because it offered the most
vivid way of disclosing the evils of existing society and evoking the ideal of a better
one. Besides, under tsarist censorship, literature provided them with an effective and
practical way of putting their ideas across; some of the kruzhki were associated with
literary journals and used them to communicate with a wider public. Science they
revered because it seemed to vouchsafe them absolute certainty. They were attracted
to the natural sciences for the promise of industrial development and increased
mastery over nature, to the social sciences for the assurance of progress towards a
more humane society. ‘Without science,’ the radical thinker Alexander Herzen once
said, ‘there is no salvation for modern man.’
Their earnest zeal was not unlike that of the English Utilitarians, jettisoning
superstition and tradition in favour of hard-headed realistic work for the betterment of
the people on scientific principles. With no parliament to implement reform, however,
most of the circles, the kruzhki, thought this goal could only be achieved by
overthrowing the tsarist régime.
This is where the foundations were laid for the secular utopian project of the
Communists. Lenin called his doctrine ‘scientific socialism’ and asserted that
‘Marxism is all- powerful because it is true’.
Today, after 70 years of the Soviet experience, Lenin’s confidence no longer carries
very much weight. But Russian intellectuals have not abandoned the search for a set
of principles by which to live. And, as the intoxication of ideology has faded, so some
of the impulses behind that ideology, the commitment of all embracing ideas, the
worship of literature and science, have re-emerged as an enduring deposit from those
far-off days, and have coloured the resumption of autonomous intellectual life. In the
absence of any public forum in which to debate, intellectuals have only been able to
fall back on the tradition of the kruzhok, remarkably like that of their 19th-century
predecessors.
After Stalin’s death in 1953, the general mistrust of police informers gradually eased,
and gatherings of intellectuals became more frequent and spontaneous. People sought

3

each other out and tried to understand what had happened to them all in the whirlwind
years of war, purges and officially sponsored falsehood. Their exchanges of thought
and experience were soon seasoned by the accounts of those returning from labour
camps, able to tell of a nether circle of the Stalinist inferno which everyone had dimly
guessed at, but few had survived to bear witness. Among these homespun chroniclers
of the underworld were even a few singers, bards with guitars, who refashioned
popular ditties through the medium of the labour-camp song, and thus resurrected
long-suppressed folk wisdom in modern guise: a Soviet version of the Blues, if you
like.
These penurious salons had little to offer gastronomically, but they were, in the words
of a participant, ‘sumptuous, endless feasts of the spirit’. What they made possible
was the mutual assimilation and digestion of uncomfortable truths, which is a
prerequisite for the formation of public opinion anywhere. This renewed exchange of
information and ideas coincided with Khrushchev’s ‘secret speech’ of 1956, with the
return of hundreds of thousands of prisoners from the camps, with the beginning of
the mass reception of Western broadcasts, and it opened an era of spiritual turmoil
and questioning. Many intellectuals were still entirely nourished by the legacy of the
Russian revolutionary movement, which they had imbibed at the school-desk. Others,
however, were opening out to a wider world, to Western liberal ideas whose attraction
was sharpened by the long experience of unbridled tyranny.
Samizdat
This was a setting in which samizdat, or do-it-yourself publishing, developed almost
spontaneously. Indeed, one could regard it as a natural extension of conversation,
born of the desire to fix little-known information and put new ideas into circulation. It
began with unpublished poetry and spread to more ambitious forms, including in the
end novels. Literature came first as a mode of underground communication, political
ideas developed later. The technology was primitive: one person would type four or
five copies; each more faded than the last, and pass them on to friends, who would
repeat the process. Whole journals and even novels were circulated in this way. So
inadequate was the supply that you might be offered a 300-page work to read in just
one night: then you would invite your trusted friends and sit round, passing pages
from one to another. An ideal milieu for the formation of tightly knit circles with their
own ardently held views! Again, the setting was very reminiscent of that which had
formed the 19th-century radicals, though the terrible lessons of the Stalin years were
to lead their successors to very different political conclusions.
In the end, the Brezhnev leadership took the decision to criminalise these activities, or
at least their natural outgrowth, samizdat. The turning-point, characteristically, was a
literary one: the arrest in 1965 of two writers, Andrei Smyavskii and Yulii Daniel, for
allowing their samizdat stories not merely to circulate among friends, but to be
published in the West under pseudonyms. This abrupt reassertion of ideological
authority faced not only writers but also many other Soviet intellectuals with a
challenge; they feared a return to Stalin’s methods, to secret trials, savage sentences,
the victimisation of friends and relatives. The answer they devised to this threat
stemmed from the Russian tradition of self-reliant solidarity in adversity, but it also
contained a vital new component: the Western ideal of freedom of speech and the rule
of law. What these politically-aware intellectuals did was to get together, not allow
themselves to be intimidated and demand that the Soviet authorities should observe

4

their own laws. To overcome the problem of communicating with the Soviet public,
they began to cultivate foreign correspondents, whose dispatches were often
rebroadcast from Western radio stations.
So the Sinyavskii-Daniel trial brought together concerned individuals, gave them the
watchwords of ‘legality’ and ‘publicity’—glasnost, that is, long before Gorbachev—
and opened up the possibility of communication with the outside world and even
indirectly with Soviet society itself. In that way the pattern was set for the gradual
formation of an alternative public opinion, a crucially important process for
understanding what is taking place now. Of its initial activists, the signatories of
protest letters in the late Sixties, more than half were scholars, including many natural
scientists, and a quarter were writers. The public tribune of the movement was Andrei
Sakharov, whose nuclear weapons work had alerted him to the unscrupulous and
irresponsible way in which the Soviet leaders were exploiting the formidable
technological power at their disposal. Sakharov had become convinced that only
resolute defence of human rights could render governments accountable to their
peoples, and thus restrain them from mortally dangerous abuses of power.
Few scientists had Sakharov’s saintly single-mindedness, but as a social stratum they
were unusually well placed to identify abuses of power, and they enjoyed the prestige,
the confidence of being indispensable, which enabled them to voice their concern. For
a time, in the late Sixties, scientific institutes became centres of human rights protest
activity. The authorities would react, sometimes with job dismissals and expulsions
from the Party, but more often with milder penalties, such as official rebukes, which
at least left those affected still holding their jobs and able to pursue further research.
There is some evidence, in fact, that quiet resistance by academic councils and even
by Party organisations within the Academy dissuaded the authorities from taking
harsher reprisals.
Most striking is the fact that the Academy of Sciences, though it did not treat
Sakharov well, never expelled him from membership, even at the time of his deepest
official disgrace. This was not necessarily a sign of civic courage; more likely it was a
defence of privilege. But still: the life tenure of academicians is a rallying cry which,
however un-heroic, limits in practice the power of the Party and establishes a tiny
bridgehead for political pluralism.
Of course, the great majority of writers and scientists were not involved directly in
human rights agitation and did not become open dissenters. But once Stalin’s mass
terror had ended, many of them shut themselves away in their institutes to devote
themselves, along with a few like-minded colleagues, to what they considered
promising fields of research, regardless of ideological implications. Whole branches
of science, neglected or suppressed under Stalin— cybernetics, genetics, the social
sciences— were revived and discreetly cultivated. In some of these new fields, even
or perhaps especially ones which accorded ill with Marxist ideology, Soviet science
established itself as a world leader, as in literary theory and semiotics, thanks to the
seminar of Professor Yurii Lotman at Tartu University in Estonia.
Free-Thinking Research
Another more practical example was the work of the Institute of Economics and
Industrial Organisation at the Academy of Sciences in Novosibirsk. After Avel

5

Aganbegyan was appointed its director in 1967, it became the leading centre for
research into what might be called the ‘socialist market economy’, as distinct from the
centrally administered model which Stalin had introduced and Brezhnev was
restoring. Every month the institute produced a journal which eventually gained a
worldwide reputation for its penetrating analyses of Soviet economic weaknesses and
its propounding of alternatives. In 1983 Aganbegyn’s institute sent a long report to the
post-Brezhnev leaders, devastatingly critical of the state of the economy, and this laid
the cornerstone for the current economic perestroika. So, non-conformist work long
discreetly pursued is now playing a vital role.
If scientists were able to get away comparatively lightly with such free-thinking
research, it was because the work they were doing was important to the political
leaders, and also because scientists quite simply enjoyed a high standing which
predated the origins of the Communist Party. Much the same kind of prestige attaches
to writers, which explains why the institutions of literature, and especially the ‘thick
journals’, became the other major centres of what might be called ‘establishment nonconformity’.
The Soviet ‘thick journal’ has a certain Victorian quality to it. It would look far more
familiar to subscribers of the Quarterly Review than to periodical readers in Britain
today. It’s a kind of monthly intellectual hamper of goodies which lands on the
doormat. Predominantly but by no means purely literary, it combines prose, poetry
and drama with reviews and comment on the great issues of the day. Social,
philosophical and scientific problems are grist to its mill. If controversial, they are
often tackled in the form of literary criticism, which is a convenient and acceptable
camouflage.
This has made the ‘thick journal’ the ideal forum for discussing the underlying
problems of Soviet society. Until very recently such discussions had to be couched in
an oblique and allusory style, to circumvent the censorship and this has made them
difficult for outsiders to follow. In a sense, though, their enigmatic quality is part of
the mystique which journals have found it expedient to develop, involving readers in
an intellectual cryptogram accessible to a quite numerous but still limited circle of
initiates and fellow believers. So each journal has evolved not only its own political
attitude, but also its own distinctive clientele, its relationship with whom creates a
kind of social magnetic field.
The most celebrated example of the type was Novyi mir (New World), especially in
the Sixties under the editorship of Aleksandr Tvardovskii. Tvardovskii was the son of
a peasant expropriated during the collectivisation of agriculture and deported to
Siberia, so that he experienced personally the harsh realities of the Stalin era. This
didn’t prevent him being a loyal Communist and a very popular war poet, whose
literary hero, the peasant lad Vasilii Tyorkin, a kind of Tommy Atkins of the Red
Army, was to be found in the knapsack of many a Soviet soldier. Tvardovskii’s Party
loyalty, though, was of a distinctive variety. He interpreted Party-mindedness in
literature to mean telling the truth about what the ordinary people had undergone in
the upheavals of Soviet history, not concealing the suffering Stalin had inflicted on
them. Such frankness was officially tolerated as long as Khrushchev’s de-Stalinisation
was in progress, but Tvardovskii continued it, even deepened it, after Khrushchev’s
fall in 1964.

6

I recall myself from my spell at Moscow University at that time with what eagerness
the monthly arrival of the bright blue volume was awaited. You had to be a personal
subscriber: there was no chance of buying a spare copy at a bookstall. On the
evidence of readers’ letters Vladimir Lakshin, Tvardovskii’s deputy, has claimed that
Novyi mir became part of people’s lives that it ‘inspired a faith in the indestructibility
of the truth and helped people to live’. I well remember the earnest enthusiasm of its
loyal readers. In a world where everyone knew the public media were full of
distortions and evasions, Tvardovskii’s skill and courage in fighting for authors in
whom he believed kept open a unique channel of unclogged communication.
Perhaps his greatest contribution to Soviet culture was to make possible a serious reexamination of the Stalin period. Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s story, A Day in the Life of
Ivan Denisovich, which Tvardovskii personally steered through formidable political
obstacles, recounted candidly the routine of a Stalinist labour camp in all its squalor
and inhumanity. The publication in 1962 of this sober but cogent aperçu released a
flood of popular memory. Thousands of ordinary Soviet citizens wrote heartfelt letters
to Solzhenitsyn, thanking him in glowing terms for daring to disclose what they had
lived through but had never ventured to talk of openly. Many of them appended their
own detailed accounts, providing for Solzhenitsyn the first of the materials he later
wove into his much more comprehensive survey, The Gulag Archipelago.
Overnight, Solzhenitsyn became, as it were, honorary activist for a nation which had
lacked its own memory. This was the ‘return of the repressed’, not in the individual
psyche, but in the cultural community. And as Freud has taught us, the repressed
always returns with tremendous emotional force. Such was doubly the case in a nation
which had never been able properly to mourn its tormented and murdered fellow
citizens.
Tvardovskii and Novyi mir performed another signal service for the folk memory, and
that was the cultivation of a school of rural authors, peasants by origin who had risen
with the precipitate upward social mobility of the Soviet era to receive their training at
the Gorky Institute of Literature and to become writers. Their personal experience
bridged a profound chasm in Soviet society, between the urban and the rural. For
millions of Soviet citizens alive today, the decisive life event was the migration from
village to town, usually at an early age, initially to do military service or acquire an
education, having completed which they would not return home, but would move
heaven and earth to find a job in town and somewhere to live—often enduring years,
even a lifetime, in crowded and substandard accommodation in order to realise their
ambition. In a sense, their feat of individual dedication to the urban ideal replicated
the total historical experience of Soviet society, with its worship of industry,
technology, education and culture. Both in the macrocosm and the microcosm, this
dedication was achieved at the cost, not only of turning one’s back on rural life, but
also of denigrating it, devaluing it as something from which to escape at all costs.
How many Soviet citizens have, in this way, denied their own childhood?
The village writers thus tapped a deep and long blocked-up stream of feeling. Their
leisurely evocations of the work and customs of the peasant community stimulated a
strong reaction among readers who had once known that way of life, or had heard
their parents talk about it. Again, this was a kind of ‘return of the repressed’, for the

7

values of the village community had been repressed for at least a generation, partly
because the official ideology imposed such amnesia, but partly also because
individuals making their way in the modern world preferred to put what they were
abandoning firmly behind them.
The intensity of the reception given to ‘village writing’ also owed a good deal to the
perception that the urban world had not brought with it the unclouded contentment of
the utopian vision. Far from it: by the mid-Sixties, when the Soviet Union was at last
becoming a predominantly urban society, towns seemed to entail ugliness, pollution,
stress, loneliness, alcoholism, delinquency and unstable family life. Such at least was
a widespread impression. Many Soviet writers of the last generation have in fact been
actuated by motives similar to those of our own Victorian novelists: by fear of a new
kind of contagious moral and spiritual disorder, spread by the teeming industrial
towns. They strove to combat this disease by reasserting values inherited from an
earlier, ostensibly more stable and humane era. At a stroke the Promethean Soviet
drive towards the future had been inverted, had become the worship of a lost golden
age!
Altogether, the Brezhnev years may have been an era of stagnation, but they were also
one of convalescence. A society which had been atomised and traumatised under
Stalin was slowly and painfully reconstituting its memory and reknitting the fabric of
social solidarity. It turned out that the Soviet people were not afflicted by total
amnesia. A dim sense of loss of community was reawakening, together with an
intellectual inheritance which had not completely succumbed to the totalitarian
rewriting of history. So a certain basis did exist for the revival of autonomous social
institutions and eventually of genuine politics. The preoccupation with human rights
was the first sign of recovery, but it gradually broadened to embrace underlying issues
of nationality, religion, culture and the natural environment. The articulation of these
concerns will form the subject-matter of my remaining lectures.

8

