REITH LECTURES 1988: The Rediscovery of Politics
Geoffrey Hosking
Lecture 3: A Civil Society in Embryo
TRANSMISSION: 22 November 1988 – Radio 4

Last year a turning-point was reached in Soviet history. The government passed a
decree banning tree-felling around the great Siberian fresh-water Lake Baikal and
requiring the Baikal Pulp and Paper Combine to phase out the production of cellulose.
Hardly the stuff of historic turning- points you might think. But if you think about it
for a moment it actually contradicts the relentless drive towards economic growth
which Soviet Communists have always regarded as a paramount priority. Lenin, after
all, was fond of saying that ‘Communism equals Soviet power plus electrification of
the whole country’. That meant accepting everything which electrification and
accompanying forms of modernisation entailed. So, in a sense, last year Soviet power
was stopped in its tracks. How did this come about?
In the formative years of the Soviet system, and especially during the Thirties and
Forties, the primacy of economic growth was so undisputed that no heed whatever
was paid to environmental damage resulting from industrial development. The
predominant attitude to nature was that it was there to be conquered! In any case, the
cumulative effects of pollution were not readily apparent at first. Blast furnaces,
power stations and chemical plants were built at frenzied speed and left to belch their
fumes into the air and discharge their effluents into the rivers. Lenin’s ‘electrification
of the whole country’ was pursued at headlong pace. Films were made and poems
composed about Dneproges, the hydroelectric project on the lower River Dnieper
which was one of the great show- pieces of the first five-year plan, but no one at the
time deemed it worth mentioning that thousands of acres of agricultural land and
forest had been destroyed to make way for it.
In the early Sixties, though, the public mood, at least as articulated by writers and
scientists, began to change. One reason for this was mounting disillusionment inside
the Party with Khrushchev’s headstrong character, his refusal to heed the advice of
scientists about the damaging side-effects of his grandiose projects. Take, for
example, his much trumpeted programme for sowing vast areas of Western Siberia—
the so-called virgin lands. It caused massive soil erosion because elementary
precautions were not taken. But it wasn’t just a matter of Khrushchev personally. In
his idiosyncratic way he was only reflecting a general characteristic of the system: the
fascination with size and speed, the drive to construct everything as big as possible
and as fast as possible. This drive was institutionalised; it was inherent in the political
structure: any ministry which was made responsible for a major project would
automatically receive increased funding and additional personnel. Ministerial empirebuilding had its own logic, regardless of the effects any particular scheme might have
on the rest of the economy or on the environment, and regardless even of whether it
had any prospect of ultimately paying for itself. This is a classic example of the
absence of checks and balances within the totalitarian system: although laws existed
to protect nature, any powerful minister who could persuade the Party’s ruling bodies

1

of the desirability of his pet project would receive an unconditional green light for its
implementation.
It was writers and scientists who first sounded the alarm. The object of the first ever
environmental campaign in the Soviet Union was the very same Lake Baikal, which
the government finally agreed last year to protect. The purity of Baikal’s water was
threatened by careless timber-felling and by the construction of two cellulose factories
to produce specially tough cord for the tyres of heavy bombers. This has been a
quarter-century-long battle royal: on the one side the military-industrial complex with
its strategic imperatives and its grip on the Party apparatus, on the other the status of
Baikal as the world’s largest reservoir of fresh water, home to unique forms of aquatic
life, and backed by well-informed writers and scientists. The campaign started in the
early Sixties, when Khrushchev’s anti- Stalin drive was still at its height and criticism
of powerful authorities was being tolerated, if only sporadically and hesitantly. This
was the period of Solzhenitsyn’s Ivan Denisovich which I mentioned last week. By
the time censorship was tightened again, Baikal had already become a cause célèbre
and could not just be stuffed back into the bottle. It had become acknowledged as a
matter, pot just of economic efficiency, but of national pride.
The result has been a prolonged and somewhat muffled war of attrition between the
industrial ministries and the ecological campaigners. Today, the campaigners are
headed by the Siberian novelist Valentin Rasputin, who has publically complained
that, as a result, he has very little time left for his creative writing. A series of official
decisions to reduce pollution of Baikal was stealthily circumnavigated by industrial
ministries eager to maximise their output and minimise their expenditure. Until
recently they were able to count on an uninquisitive press, but last year the
campaigners achieved a success in the form of the government decree which I
described as a turning-point. But even this is not total victory. Rasputin himself
reports that the new combination of supervision from above and from below, by the
public, is at last producing results, but he also warns that the battle to ensure
beneficial decisions are actually implemented will continue for a long time yet.
Over the years, environmentalists have been able to establish a foothold partly
because their concerns reflect genuine economic dilemmas of the kind that pitch one
ministry against another and therefore divide the Party leadership. The American
political scientist Thane Gustafson has pointed out that what appear to be pressure
groups in the Soviet Union cannot actually become effective unless the Party
leadership is genuinely uncertain or divided about which of two alternative policies to
adopt. As he rightly remarks, this is not pressure group politics, but the politics of
waiting for the open window.’
Apart from Baikal, one or two other ‘open windows’ have appeared during the last 20
years or so, and a semi-tolerated public debate has been taking place. During the
Sixties, for instance, it became possible to cast doubt on the advisability of
constructing huge hydroelectric power stations. The institution responsible for them,
Gidroproekt, had originally been part of the immense NKVD economic network,
which included Stalin’s labour camps, and it inherited from those days an imperious
and secretive manner. Criticism of Gidroproekt became possible mainly because other
equally powerful agencies found their own interests impaired by its activities. The
Ministry of Fisheries discovered that its catches were declining in the lower reaches

2

of rivers that were dammed upstream. The timber industry lost valuable sources of
raw material. And the higher priority which Khrushchev assigned to agriculture
alerted everyone to the loss of fertile arable land.
It still needed a scholar of insight and pertinacity to crystallise this opposition.
Academician Vendrov, of the Institute of Water Problems, made it his business to
assemble information and direct it to influential quarters, as well as training graduate
students to support and continue his work. According to Gustafson, who interviewed
some of them, ‘In the early Seventies Vendrov’s students were filled with a crusading
spirit. They saw themselves as the front-line defence of the environment, and had
detailed knowledge of the work done by similar groups in the West.’ Being a member
of an advisory panel attached to the State Planning Committee—Gosplan— Vendrov
was able to press his points home at the highest level, and to contribute, perhaps
decisively, to a moderation of the all-powerful hydroelectric urge.
River Diversions
The most remarkable environmental battle of all, however, and the one which has
done most to raise the level of public awareness, was fought over the proposed
diversion of Russia’s northern rivers. It has been one of the country’s great
geographic misfortunes that most of its major rivers flow unproductively into the
Arctic Ocean, while large areas of the Volga basin and Central Asia are semi-arid or
worse. Even in tsarist times one or two engineers had put forward schemes for
diverting some of these rivers so that part of their flow went southwards; and a
Communist régime which prided itself on its ability to ‘transform nature’ was not
likely to remain permanently resigned to the cussedness of geography.
The only problem from the government’s point of view was the breathtaking cost of
the hydraulic works required. However, the 25th Party Congress in 1976 felt affluent
enough to order full-scale scientific studies of the possibility of diverting water from
the rivers Ob, Irtysh, and perhaps Enisei, through a 2,000km-long canal to flow into
the Aral and Caspian Seas, with feeders to provide irrigation for the cotton-growing
areas of Central Asia and for the industrial towns of Western Siberia.
Among the project’s principal protagonists were the Central Asian Communist Party
organisations, eager to receive cheap supplies of water to sustain a wasteful and
corrupt local economy. But most influential of all was Minvodkhoz, the Ministry of
Water Resources and Melioration. This ministry is one of the prune Soviet leviathans.
Responsible for all hydraulic, irrigation and drainage work throughout the country, it
employs by its own account one and half million people, which I estimate at
something approaching one per cent of the entire Soviet population of working age.
When I spoke to some of the ministry’s leading officials earlier this year, they were
unbowed by recent setbacks and confident that the country would one day recognise
again the need for river diversions and come running back to them for help. They
were polite but unmistakably scornful about the temporary fashion for taking notice of
ignorant amateurs expressing opinions on such complex matters. No doubt that would
pass, they implied. Meanwhile, they were stockpiling the feasibility reports of no less
than 150 research institutes on various aspects of the project, against the day when
they would be needed. Just casting an eye over these mounds of paper I could sense
the sheer scope of the patronage that lies stored up in a project like this, capable of
employing and paying hundreds of thousands of people for many years.

3

Initially, the opponents of Minvodkhoz took longer to make their views felt.
Economists have always tended to oppose the project, reckoning there must be
cheaper ways of preserving water, and over the years they have signalled their
reservations in specialist journals. But once again, it was natural scientists and writers
who were more successful in making opposition effective. The writer Vasilii Belov—
ecological spokesman for northern Russia as Rasputin is for Siberia—was especially
worried about the monasteries and churches of his homeland, most of which lie along
river banks and are vulnerable to any rise in the water- level. Unable to publish his
views in the Soviet press, he eventually resorted, in the summer of 1982, to an émigré
newspaper in Paris. Under Gorbachev such subterfuges became unnecessary and the
Writers’ Union congress only four years later turned into a concerted forum for public
opposition to river diversions. ‘Glasnost is all very well,’ complained Rasputiri, ‘but
what use is it if nothing changes as a result?’
Scientists were also stirring themselves to take advantage of the new political
conjuncture. They were worried about the effects of flooding on the soil, and about
the dangers to the world climate of curtailing the flow of so much relatively warm
water into the Arctic Ocean. The Academy of Sciences held interdisciplinary seminars
in 1985, which aroused such interest and concern that a voluntary commission was set
up under Academician Yanshin to study the whole project and present an alternative
report on it. This commission brought together specialists from a variety of fields: soil
science, law, biology, ethnography, and so on. One of its members, whom I talked to,
emphasised that it was a voluntary enterprise, set up from below out of shared
concern, without official instructions of any kind. He also told me that Minvodkhoz
and the Central Asian Party organisations had tried to have it banned, but in vain.
The commission argued that, quite apart from the cost, the environmental
consequences of the project were incalculable and potentially very damaging, and the
report recommended abandoning the whole thing. Together with the appeal from the
Writers’ Union, this report was probably decisive in impelling the Politburo in August
1986 to order the suspension of all construction work, pending further study. It was
not quite a conclusive victory for the ecologists, but it was nevertheless a remarkable
success. Sergei Zalygin, chief editor of the thick journal Novyi mir and himself a
hydraulic engineer by training, hailed the decision as the first ever triumph of ‘public
opinion’ over Gosplan and the industrial ministries. It was certainly an indication of a
sea- change in the official attitude to the environment, and also in the capacity of
writers and scientists to articulate views—or at least doubts and fears—hitherto
widely held by people powerless to change anything.

Informal Associations
In the last couple of years, in conditions of glasnost, the environmental issue has
proved to be an excellent catalyst for mobilising a wider public. It encapsulates
people’s apprehension and resentment about the way the system can cause them
untold harm without a word of information or consultation. As a Soviet friend said to
me recently, ‘Stalin only murdered his contemporaries. Today the industrial ministries
are signing the death warrants of unknown millions of this planet’s future
inhabitants.’

4

Naturally enough, young people feel especially concerned about this situation, and
environmental hazards, together with the threat to historical monuments, have roused
the country’s youth to protest in a way which has not been seen since the Twenties.
Both nature and culture are jeopardised in a way previous generations have not
experienced and this has helped to radicalise a younger generation growing up better
educated but with a less obvious role in society than their predecessors. In their active
concern about the dangers, they have been brought up against fundamental aspects of
the system: its highly authoritarian and secretive nature, its negligence of the interests
and rights of its own citizens. This learning process has in turn brought them into
contact with the human rights protesters of earlier years in a mushrooming and
disparate movement of what have become know as ‘informal associations.’
Take, for example, Leningrad in early 1987, when the City Soviet announced that it
was planning to demolish the Hotel Angleterre, where the much-loved poet Sergei
Esenin committed suicide in 1925. Several historical and ecological groups, mostly of
young people, collected signatures in the street for a petition to save the building.
Partly by deception and partly by brute force, the City Soviet cleared the
demonstrators away and moved in their demolition squads. The sudden destruction of
the hotel caught the protesters by surprise and taught them that they faced a more
furtive and ruthless opponent than they had realised. They drew from their failure the
lesson that they must work better together in future. So they set up an umbrella
organisation, the Cultural Democratic Movement, with its own samizdat journal.
Warned by painful experience, this journal bears the watchword ‘Claws and teeth for
public opinion!’ and in the first number its editor called for ‘the activation of public
opinion’ as ‘an effective instrument of perestroika’. The message recalls Edmund
Burke’s plea justifying pluralist politics in 18th-century Britain, ‘When bad men
combine, the good must associate; else they will fall, one by one, an unpitied sacrifice
in a contemptible struggle.’
This kind of banding together in defence of the environment, cultural values and legal
rights has become, in my view, the single most important new factor in Soviet politics
of the last couple of years. For nothing could change the nature of the system more
than the stable existence of political associations independent of the Party’s control
and with secure access to the public media. That is not the case yet, but things are
moving in that direction, and if the trend is consolidated, we shall be able to speak
confidently of the end of totalitarianism.
The sheer number and variety of informal associations is striking. Earlier this year the
Soviet press reckoned there were 30,000 of them and estimated that nearly threequarters of young people belong to one or more. This implies that in their capacity to
attract young people they now outstrip the Communist Party’s own youth movement,
the Komsomol, despite the career prospects it offers. Perhaps half of the informal
associations are in the field of culture or sport, and only about a tenth are estimated to
be directly addressing political and social problems, though quite a large number are
defending the environment or historical monuments in a way which often raises
political implications, as we have seen in the Leningrad case.
Some of them have arisen inside official institutions. The Klub Perestroika in
Moscow, for example, grew out of discussions held at the Central EconomicMathematical Institute in the spring of 1987. Others have sprung up at the grass roots,

5

like the Club for Social Initiatives, which originated in a youth discussion group held
in the communal meeting-room of an apartment block on the Arbat, in central
Moscow. Yet others have emerged in response to a specific occasion. The election
campaign for the 19th Party Conference this summer stimulated the formation of a
number of unofficial ‘action groups’ in provincial towns, to complain about the
Party’s manipulation of delegate selection and to stimulate public debate on the issues
to be raised at the conference.
The forms of activity undertaken by the unofficial associations have been varied and
exuberant, even chaotic. The Club for Social Initiatives, for example, has been
providing help for the old and the ill; working to preserve old buildings; organising
classes for workers on ‘self-administration’; offering advice to people whose rights
have been infringed; agitating for a monument to Stalin’s victims. In the process, it
has divided into specialist groups. Sensibly, for it was in danger of becoming Age
Concern, Amnesty International, Greenpeace and the Citizens Advice Bureau all
rolled into one.
This enthusiastic diversity has led one or two observers to write off the informal
associations as frivolous or confused. I can understand such strictures, but this is a
country where an enormous amount needs - to be done. Besides, in the nature of
totalitarianism all political activity has hitherto been monopolised by the Party. So it’s
scarcely surprising that the first attempts at autonomous initiative should be
disorganised and should aim at too many targets. A great deal of the institutional
shaking out still has to take place.
One practical choice which sooner or later faces most associations is whether to put
the emphasis on acting as a ginger group within existing structures, or whether to
dissociate themselves altogether from the inherited order of things and to agitate from
outside. The dilemma is inherent in the current political situation. After all, a
monopoly party is sponsoring reforms which, if consistently pursued, will end that
monopoly. At any rate, this bifurcation has split the Klub Perestroika into two wings:
on the one side Democratic Perestroika— more technocratic, strict about membership
admission, in favour of working within the system, a bit like our own Social
Democratic Party—and on the other side, Perestroika-88—more libertarian, more
open about membership, less prepared to compromise beliefs in the interests of
power, in the spirit of what used to be our Liberal Party.
This kind of fracture may not be too damaging, since both sides seem to maintain
good personal relationships, unlike their forbears in the 19th-century radical
movements. In the uncertain and ambiguous current situation both modes of activism
are probably fruitful in their own way. One view of the requisite strategy was put to
me forcefully by Alexander Podiabinek. Still in his thirties, Podrabinek is already a
veteran of the human rights movement, and now editor of the unofficial journal
Ekspress-Khronika. ‘If a cart is stuck in a bog,’ he said, ‘then the best way to haul it
out is not to wade into the mud, but to stand back from it, on firm ground, so as to
have a reliable foothold.’ His own firm ground—and this is true of many informal
activists—is Orthodox Christianity, which he learned from Dostoevsky, but which
(unlike Dostoevsky) he regards as entailing a respect for individual freedom which
can only be secured through the rule of law. As he sees it, those who proclaim
‘socialism’ as the basic principle, or who try to work through a system which

6

disregards individual freedom, are merely slithering about in the mud, and are likely
to share the fate of the cart they are trying to extricate.
Podrabinek has suffered for his beliefs. In the Seventies he edited an information
bulletin on psychiatric abuse, and wrote a book on the subject which was published in
the West. For this he was charged with slandering the Soviet state and sentenced to
five years’ exile in Siberia. He returned doubly convinced of the need for this sort of
activity, and founded Ekspress-Khronika last summer with the aim of recording and
publicising violations of human rights in the Soviet Union. Its editors meet every
Saturday morning in a fiat on the outskirts of Moscow: in the afternoon the typists get
to work, usually going on far into the night, and on Sunday morning the journal is
distributed on the Gogol Boulevard in the centre of the city. People come to pick up
copies, pay what they can afford, and stay to ask questions. The police stand around in
the background and watch, but don’t usually interfere.
An unofficial publication of this kind puts an immense strain on those involved. There
are constant telephone calls to be answered, often from people distraught over what
has happened to them, and their reports, whenever possible, must be checked. Typists
and paper must be found, also couriers to distribute the final product:
Ekspress-Khronika goes to 53 towns, in 11 of which it is further typed and passed on.
And all of this must be done by people who have jobs of their own, and often families
to look after, in overcrowded apartments, where books and papers seem to overflow
from every shelf and table. The production process would be far less hectic if such
journals could be officially registered. As Podrabinek remarked at a conference of
unofficial editors last year, ‘If we enjoyed the status of a co-operative, we could open
a bank account, buy paper, rent premises, conclude a contract with a printing firm,
have our own copying equipment.’ But the authorities have not seen fit to concede
such an alien kind of normality; alien, I mean to the Soviet system as it has functioned
up to now.
The authorities are in fact in an awkward quandary over the informal associations.
After all, Article 9 of the Soviet constitution specifically states that the political
system should evolve in the direction of ‘greater involvement of citizens in the
administration of state and society’; and Gorbachev himself has appealed for
‘initiative from below’. But the fact remains that the Party has invariably exercised
pretty tight supervision over citizens’ initiatives before, and some of these new
associations are painfully probing in the questions they raise. No one in the Party
leadership actually opposes perestroika, but its more cautious advocates have warned
that the associations encourage extremism and endanger the leading role of the Party.
As for Gorbachev himself, at the Party Conference in July he commented with
cautious approval on ‘the stormy growth of public associations reflecting all the
diversity of social interests’, and he reminded his audience that ‘under the one-party
system we need a permanent mechanism for juxtaposing opinions, criticism and selfcriticism’. His remarks implied that he hopes to weed out the few irreconcilable
groups and weld the rest into a broad non- party organisation, a kind of ‘people’s
front’. He is not, however, disposed to have others do this for him. When some of the
informal associations gathered in Moscow in May to form a ‘Democratic Union’ as an
official opposition to the Communist Party, their foundation meeting was harassed by
police. Most of their subsequent gatherings have suffered the same fate. In keeping

7

with the Party’s current ambivalence, however, their members have not been indicted
for subversion, as would unquestionably have happened up to a year or two ago.
Overall, the proliferation of unofficial associations and journals suggests that
Russians have lost none of their skill at improvising functioning human institutions
under great pressure. Perhaps as a result of coexisting in the same society the other
Soviet nations seem to have acquired a similar skill, as I shall try to show next week.
It is striking, too, that most of the political associations formed hitherto represent
ideals rather than interests. They are true children of a society where ideas are
accorded the highest respect. But the way they’ve chosen to fight for those ideals is
new. They’ve rejected outright the utopianism and also the violence of the 19th
century radicals and have turned instead to the weapons of legality and publicity.
There was nothing like this in Khrushchev’s thaw either: the few timid groups that
appeared then were swiftly rounded up by the police.
So we have genuinely reached a new stage: the elements of a civil society are now in
place. But not securely: the informal associations are in a state of unstable
equilibrium, not being closed down but not being legalised either. Probably the
authorities would like to take most of them over and tame them, under Party
sponsorship and supervision, as a kind of collective ‘people’s front in support of
perestroika’. But, given the current mood of intellectuals and the authorities’ forced
ideological retreat, the Party might well find in the long run that it was being
transformed by such cohabitation as much as the associations it was trying to
remould. We can already see something of the sort beginning to happen in the Baltic,
as I shall report next week. The fact is that the authorities can no longer entirely
contain society’s impulse to self-mobilisation. They must to some extent compromise
with it—at least if they don’t want to return to Stalinist terror. It is out of such
compromises that mutual toleration— and even a degree of authentic democracy—
sometimes grows. The future of the informal associations will be a touchstone by
which one can judge the evolution of Soviet politics.

8

