REITH LECTURES 1989: Beyond the Tunnel of History
Presenter: Jacques Darras
Lecture 5: Towards the Light
TRANSMISSION: 20 December 1989 RADIO 4

My eldest daughter teaches Latin and Greek to children in a grammar school in
Calais. Living up north there (though I know that to English people Calais means the
south) is quite a daunting and forbidding experience for a girl trained in the
intellectual warmth of Paris—in spite of her father’s professed admiration for the
north. However, she lives in a beautiful flat overlooking the Channel. On a clear night
you can make out the lights of Dover and Folkestone, a tangible reality almost within
touching distance, and there is a sense of comfort knowing that England is there in
front of you and France at your back. Ships pass constantly in and out of harbour,
giving a sense of movement, and (as I suggested earlier) a sense of freedom; it is as if
one’s imagination were hoisted aboard and one’s own sense of mobility thus
enhanced. Forgive the poetic flight—or voyage—of fancy. Perhaps you think lam
trying to sound like Walt Whitman, reflecting on the Brooklyn Ferry back in the
1850s. As a matter of fact, the poet I have in mind, rather, is William Wordsworth.
In 1802 Napoleon and England agreed on a short truce that came to be called the
Peace of Amiens. It was signed in March. William Wordsworth had fled Jacobin
France back in 1793, leaving behind the French girl he had fallen in love with,
Annette Vallon, and their child Caroline. Nine years had passed when, thanks to that
short interlude in the hostilities, William was able to cross the Channel to Calais
where, flanked by his sister Dorothy, he met Annette, who introduced him to his
daughter for the first time.
It must have been an intensely emotional meeting. Sometimes when I visit my own
daughter in her flat overlooking the beach at Calais, I can easily visualise the poet and
his little Caroline attempting to communicate—William trying out his French,
Annette her rather rusty English if she ever had any, and Caroline doubtless totally
bewildered. Later, Wordsworth wrote a poem on the event:
It is a beauteous evening, calm and free,
The holy time is quiet as a nun
Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
Is sinking down in its tranquillity.
It is not too fanciful, I think, to take this stroll of a father and his estranged daughter
on the beach at Calais in the lull of the Napoleonic storm as an evocative symbol of
the estrangement of Europe from itself. The poem tells of the death of an age, of the
passing of a civilisation. It tells of the death of passion that was ushered in by politics
at the time of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars; and it tells of a
growing divorce, the width of the Channel between post-Revolutionary France and
Burkean England, a rift we have still not entirely bridged as Europe edges towards
greater unity.

1

I believe a decisive moment in European cultural history occurred when Wordsworth
fled from the French Revolution that he had at first hailed, and returned to his birth
place in the Lake District. For in doing so he helped anchor the national identity of
England (and link it in part to the marvellous watery and mountainous county around
Grasmere and Hawkshead) while the French, desperate to find harbour, went on to
drift through ever deeper waters. Wordsworthian England draws on its own roots in
an almost organic cycle of renewal: here in its simplest and crudest form is the
Protestant concept of nation as force of nature (soon to be expropriated by less
innocent German philosophers). God is diffused throughout nature and His law felt in
every cloud and tree. The poet Basil Bunting, a Quaker, a dear friend whom I visited
in his Cumbrian redoubt many times, continued nearly two centuries later to entertain
a somewhat Wordsworthian view of things, an almost pantheistic equation of God
with the immutable, organic forces of nature. How different from the French
Revolution, bent only on uprooting the old order, marking a total divorce between
nature and law, establishing a new transcendent system of man-made law for which
you were now expected to suffer and to die like an old Christian martyr.
To this day, British—especially English—nationalism is an organic nationalism of
dissent, where each individual interiorises personally a social and political contract
presume to have the force of nature. On the Continent, certainly in France, systems of
law and politics are made by men and changeable by men. In English Common Law,
each case is considered as an offshoot of what preceded it, a new scion of an old legal
bough, unlike the bureaucratic new laws that keep turning up tied in European red
tape and postmarked Brussels. Indeed, our respective British and French nationalisms
seem to me to carry the mark of a deeper, almost theological cleft.
In English Protestantism, everyone is to some extent his own priest. Wordsworth,
indeed, used to conduct services with his co-celebrant (Dorothy) in the open, just as
John Wesley’s Methodists had done en masse in countryside meadows. We French,
on the other hand, traditionally needed prefects of the law, just as the seasoned
Catholics we are have always needed priests to put us in touch with the Divine
mystery, incapable, as it were, to interiorise the natural law ourselves, unaided. We
needed prefects and priests to rail at, to be unruly against, official screens behind
which to shelter our doubts.
Things have changed. Nowadays, apart from a small core of ‘integrists’, French
Catholicism has developed a flexible, more individualistic approach towards Rome.
The younger generation seems to respond to the notion of pilgrimage, pronounced by
Pope John Paul II at Santiago de Compostela, which combines a physically
demanding goal to be attained in space (preferably on foot) with the notion of truth as
being more of a protracted journey than an instant illumination. Now as then,
however, French attitudes have been more outward- looking, less self-regarding than
those of Protestant England, looking for illumination from above and beyond,
explicitly expressed, rather than for implied messages from that by which one is
immediately surrounded. And it was from the French to the English approach that
Wordsworth retreated when settling down once more in the Lake District.
I prefer the journeying outwards to the journeying backwards of Wordsworth. Not
because I am a Frenchman but because I am a European, and because the time has

2

long since passed when one could retreat to one’s birth place as the greatest repository
of truth and wealth. Why tie a place’ to a birth’? The concept of a birth place, a
homeland, which has nourished European nationalism for the past two centuries, has
done more evil than good, carrying as it does notions of territoriality and conquest, of
segregation and exclusion.
It is not a question of denying one’s roots or of avoiding the enrichment they can
obviously bring. That would be foolish. The question, rather, is how to build on what
they have to offer, to journey beyond them and not merely to treat them as a sanctuary
within which to escape from a wicked world. Where should we start? Are there clues
in Wordsworth himself? I wondered about this on a recent visit to Tintern Abbey. The
Wye is greasy with pollution and the environment somewhat less sylvan than in
Wordsworth’s day. But the ruins of the abbey remain a superb vision of an almost lost
civilisation as they loom up among the villages of the Welsh borders. Odd, perhaps,
that Wordsworth spared no thought for the Cistercian origins of those ruins. Mind
you, there is another church on the slope above Tintern, St Mary’s, whose tower rises
in the midst of a disused churchyard and overlooks a few comfortable new houses
probably built by Bristol executives who commute daily between poetry and business.
The entrance to St Mary’s is blocked off with cemented bricks, so Catholicism is once
again forgotten at Tintern. The English seem almost wilfully to forget that all their
great ancient churches were monuments to Catholicism, that there was once a single
religious force uniting the entire British Isles.
To me, Britain means all of Britain, not least—perhaps most of all—Celtic, Gaelic,
pre-Roman Britain. My most recent visit to Tintern followed a trip to Ireland, once the
home of European learning and enlightenment when so much else was plunged into
darkness and war. If one is journeying in search of the roots of European culture, of
our shared spiritual ‘birth place’, a voyage across the Irish Sea can take us far beyond
Tintern.
Ireland is a route rather than a destination. Just as it was to James Joyce. Stephen
Dedalus in Ulysses gets up and leaves his martello tower, his Thoor Ballylee, and
fends off, like some vagrant medieval Scot, some St Brendan of the waves, to pursue
his personal odyssey to the truth. Joyce clearly believes there is no better place, no
better birth place, than the one we are travelling towards. The journey may end where
it started; but what a wealth of experience is gathered en route!
Ireland provided a relatively late staging- post in my own circuit. I had already
travelled along several routes (not to say ruts) before coming to realise that the
standard, set-piece tours through the European cultural tradition were not particularly
to my taste. I felt ill at ease in the 18th-century spirit of pre-Revolutionary France,
which, for all its Voltairean brilliance, struck me as mainly a spirit of negation. I
journeyed in the other direction, towards the romantic tradition. But we French have
little authentic romanticism. Even with figures like Châteaubriand and Madame de
Staël, theirs is essentially a derivative romanticism, English or German. So I found
myself travelling back, all the time further back, seeking the many tributaries and, if I
could, the source. And that meant moving away beyond the familiar to other times,
other places. I became a nomad of the spirit, a traveller of the mind. My homeland
was not a location but a route. I journeyed to America, and, through poets like
Whitman, Pound, Williams, Olson and Eliot, at last engaged with my European roots,

3

which were no longer mine in particular but rather those of a community of northern
poets, travellers of the mind like myself. Through all the tangled network of relations
that wove the weft of Northern Europe I lighted upon the long hidden yet brilliant
structure of polyphonic Burgundy, which I have already talked about and which
seems to me a model for the Europe of the future. And from Burgundy the next thread
that I followed led me to the ancient culture of Ireland.
I found myself in Laon in northern France, situated halfway between Brussels and
Paris. Laon is a citadel crowning a table of chalk rising from sea-level, the only
medieval city in the region left intact after the numerous feats of destruction
performed all around by generations of warring German and French armies. Laon
survived because it was defeated: defeated when the Carolingian dynasty was
replaced by the Paris-based capétiens. History was thenceforth closed for a town that
had once been so brilliant, so renowned the world over. Laon was insulated from the
depredations of history, cocooned through time, frozen, like Pompeii, in its past. Even
the 1914-18 war largely passed it by; the men in their trenches and on their bellies
crawling through the mud spared little thought for the citadel above.
My love of Laon was aroused when I witnessed an incredibly beautiful summer
sunrise hitting the eastern rose-window of the cathedral—all the closer to the sun for
being perched atop the ‘mountain’. The rose bloomed in me. I came to read about
Laon and found myself pursuing several interesting clues. One concerned the
etymology. ‘Laon’ originally comes from the same root as Lyon and perhaps London,
and was first spelt Lugdunum, that is, literally, a fortress devoted to the worship of the
Celtic god Lug, the god of light. Laon, from being one of the favourite cities of
Charlemagne, became the capital city of his grandson, Charles the Bald, in the ninth
century. Charles the Bald was a refined and scholarly monarch who filled his court
with musicians and philosophers, the stars among whom were scholars from Ireland,
John Scotus Eriugena shining most brightly among them. One day, I wove my way
through medieval lanes with evocative names such as the rue des Irlandais to the
local archive which contains one of the richest collections of Carolingian manuscripts
in existence. There I saw a copy of Eriugena’s Commentary on the Gospel of St John
written in part in the philosopher’s own hand. I saw other manuscripts, in the margins
of which the Irish copyists complained—in Gaelic—that the weather was too cold or
the candles too low. These documents, with their so human graffiti, were well over
1,000 years old, and date from a period we deprecatingly refer to as the Dark Ages.
But Laon was not dark; Ireland was not dark. Isn’t it strange, I reflected, that those
Irish monks, descendants of the early Celtic worshippers of Lug, should have come to
Lug-town to start a school of philosophy known to history as the School of Light? Or
had some thread of light secretly illuminated their way?
We inhabit a world where light is a tangible reality—the essential reality, in a sense,
as it now serves as the standard by which we measure time as well as space. Indeed,
we now know the two to be interdependent in a way that would have brought a wry
smile to the face of Eriugena. Two centuries ago, the French revolutionaries instituted
the metre as the standard measurement of space; today the mètre is defined as a
fraction of the speed of light. Light is the constant that reveals the relativity of time
and space. Light means nature and produces the photosynthesis that renews the
oxygen we need in order to survive. And light can be turned into sound by the
radiotelescopes with which we scan ever more distant corners of our universe.

4

So we are sailing light-years away from Tm- tern Abbey, towards an ever-fleeing
origin. There is no longer a golden age of mankind to be discovered somewhere in
rural Cumbria or Wessex, no virgin European nook in which to dig ourselves a
fortress against the onrush of modernity. None of us is immune from the inexorable
processes of history. Two world wars made that clear. Today, as a new Europe begins
to take shape, we are called upon not to retreat into the flames but to cast new light
upon an ever-expanding universe of experience. The legend of Prometheus is at last
replaced as for the first time since the discovery of fire we poets are drawn to a central
metaphor which happens also to be the basis of our physical sustenance. The inner
light thus meets its outer source, the planets. Poets are no longer cast as those who
steal fire but as keepers and purveyors of light. This new role asks for a new art.
Thus, our voyage outwards has to begin with a journey backwards to those ages that,
though less advanced technologically, were more in touch philosophically with the
ether of existence. Here, surely, is a new opportunity for the poet: to radiate in the
manner of Eriugena, not to burn in the style of the followers of Prometheus, and, as
we ascend the bill of Lugdunum and build the new Europe, to take inspiration from
the City of Eternal Light. I feel poised on the ridge of Laon as I see Europe poised on
the brink of a spiritual development that will enable it to gather and build upon the
scattered embers of its past.
Now that I am approaching the end of my Reith Lectures, let me pick up the threads
of my ‘Darras’ tapestry and attempt to draw them together. I began, if you remember,
with that embodiment of democracy, the great civic squares of Europe, epitomised for
me by the Grote Markt in Brussels—and on our TV screens these past weeks by
Wenceslas Square in Prague. Then I moved down the route of history with the spirit
of mobility that I borrowed from those medieval students as they went on their
pilgrimage from one centre of learning to another, across what we now think of as
national boundaries. Here, too, my theme of mobility as a prerequisite for freedom
was dramatically acted out as I spoke, with millions of East Germans crossing a
border they hitherto presumed permanently closed.
As we pursued our journey through and beyond the tunnel of history, I have tried
always to retain my guiding dream: that the Europe we are busily trying to reshape
will embody the virtues of that almost mythical, multicultural medieval duchy of
Burgundy with its many languages and cultures vigorously jostling alongside one
another to the mutual enrichment of all. This is my vision of the new Europe of the
21st century: a nation united beyond petty nationalisms, a single society nurturing the
easy flow of people and ideas, a community of free spirits taking guidance for the
future from the brightest beacons of our shared past.

5

