REITH LECTURES 1989: Beyond the Tunnel of History
Presenter: Jacques Darras
Lecture 1: The Time Traveller
TRANSMISSION: 22 November 1989 RADIO 4

I live in Paris, just by that vast grassy square the Champ de Mars, almost in the
shadow of the colossal iron structure that dominates it, the Eiffel Tower.
And it came as a surprise, not only to me but, I suspect, to a lot of Parisians, to be
reminded in the spring of our bicentenary year, 1989 that the Eiffel Tower was built to
mark the centenary of the French Revolution, in 1889. For the French, the Eiffel
Tower is primarily a symbol of Paris, of the popularity all over the world of Paris and
of France; the very image of France to the millions of tourists who flock there. It is
also the place from which our first radio programmes were broadcast and is still one
of our principal transmission centres. So perhaps the Eiffel Tower in 1989 was a
fitting symbol with which to mark not only the French Revolution but also the
centenary of the birth of John Reith. And the Champ de Mars, as we shall see,
certainly embodies messages from history that we might wish to heed today.
The year 1989 was not in itself a particularly crucial one for celebration. Most
Frenchmen were already more aware of the importance of 1992 and 1993, which are
supposed to mark the emergence of a truly united Europe as such and the elimination
of barriers between France and its neighbours. To many, this is an exciting prospect,
even though the magic moment at which 1992 becomes 1993 will not of course
witness any sudden and spectacular elimination of national cultures or ways of
thinking. Such things shift slowly, imperceptibly, and existing patterns of thought and
behaviour will in any case have much to offer in the post-1992 pan-European world
we will allegedly be inhabiting. To many Frenchmen, indeed, the idea of ‘1992’
represents less a promise than a threat, and the ‘elimination of barriers’ sounds
ominous, rather disquieting, as though some sort of knife-a guillotine, perhaps-were
being sharpened above our innocent French heads. If we wish to be in the anniversary
business at all, it may be worth remembering that the high noon of the guillotine
occurred not in 1789, but in ‘92 and ‘93.
As we approach, for better or for worse, the shared destiny of an increasingly united
Europe, as the British and French in particular finally learn to jettison 1,000 years of
mutual suspicion and animosity with the building of the Channel Tunnel, I want to
tunnel back through our history and suggest that our respective national pasts will
need to be reinterpreted in the light of a shared future. Victor Hugo said of the French
Revolution that it was a monument not to the past but to the future, an event more
important for what it presaged than for what it ended. In the same way, the monument
I want to begin to erect is intended to be more a marker for the future than a
commemoration of the past. The two are inextricably interrelated, of course. A
milestone tells you both how far you have come and how far you still have to go. And
in order to suggest ways of facing the future, I will have much to say about the ways
in which we regard and often disregard and misregard, our past. In doing so I would
like to invite you to join me on a tour of my personal European museum. As we

1

travel through the tunnel of history together, we will call upon philosophy, history and
poetry as we start to reshape and rewrite our common cultural heritage, and consider
and occasionally reconstruct the great landmarks and symbols of our past.
Where should we start our journey? Not perhaps with the French Revolution or its
centenary or even its bicentenary. Rather, if we are thinking of the future of Europe
with an eye on the past, I would suggest the ancient and modern city of Brussels. And,
in particular, the very centre of that city, the heart of Europe’s past and of Europe’s
future, the square called in Flemish the Grote Markt and in French La Grand Place the great square. I am always struck by the perfect proportions of that square. I can
think of only one other square with comparably neat proportions and similarly
venerable connections with a great historic past and with as much seductive
architecture-the Piazza San Marco in Venice, which stands, quite fittingly, at the other
extremity of Europe.
The Grote Markt, or Grand Place, in Brussels is for me a perfect image in stone of our
European political culture at its finest-a balance, and accommodation, of the various
seats of power. Next time you visit the square, stand in the middle and you will see on
one side the palace of the Dukes of Burgundy, the seat of princely power. Opposite is
the beautiful town hall with its superbly slender tower and its gabled roof spotted with
dormer windows as in a canvas by Vermeer; this is the seat of municipal power, built
in the 1400s when the Dukes of Burgundy were at the pinnacle of their fame and
influence. Thus, both types of power, princely and municipal, face each other across
that square, almost as though in dialogue with each other, though from their
respective ramparts and across an appreciable distance. On the shorter sides of the
Grand’ Place and pushing their way alongside the great public buildings are the
beautiful, narrow, wide-windowed, gable-roofed houses of the ancient guilds, houses
built by the rich traders of late medieval Brussels who first established the power and
the fortune of the city. These houses are the very image of wealth, of well-being, of
ease, with their gilded façades, and their carved and sculpted tops. They jostle closely
together, as if they really wanted to be in the first row and didn’t want to lose an inch
in the tug-of-war that went on between the city, the municipal power, on the one side,
and the princes’ power on the other side. The merchants really want to be there, an
essential part of the show. They complete the square. They make it fit, and fitting. As
one stands in the centre of the Grand Place today, I do not think it too fanciful to see
in that square an incarnation in stone of the democratic accommodation of competing
interests that our European political culture has been striving to achieve over the
course of many subsequent centuries of struggle.
There is a further quality of the Grand Place that I find suggestive: the very light,
slight slope of the square itself. If we pursue for a moment my analogy between the
physicality of the square and the political culture it embodies, you might think that
this obliquity should indicate a lack of stability. But I would prefer to argue that, on
the contrary, you have in that gentle declivity the little extra touch of madness that
makes stability perfect. The imperfections, the roughage, the accommodation of
inconsistency and of the eccentric, of the grand and the petty, the precise and the
asymmetrical are the very touchstone of the mature political culture we have
developed.

2

People from Brussels and all over Europe, rich and poor, old and young, congregate
in the Grand Place on a summer’s night, mixing easily together and with their historic
surroundings. Some evenings when the façades are floodlit, amplified music bounces
back and forth across the great buildings so that the Grand’ Place almost resembles an
open-air ballroom. If you dance your way down the square to the bottom right-hand
corner, you will reach the King of Spain. Not the real one, of course. He was finally
ousted from Brussels back in the 17th century. Today the King of Spain is a great
drinking-house. On any of several floors of creaking wooden boards and tables and
benches, looking out over the square through ancient lattice windows, you can order
any of a quite bewildering variety of slightly sour, rasping, pungent Belgian beers. It
is a real pleasure to drink those beers overlooking and overhearing the bubbling,
babbling Babel of tongues below. It is almost as though one were in the midst of a
Bruegel canvas, the very image of a multicultural Europe united in a common
enthusiasm for diversity.
Now a sober thought surfaces. In the midst of that Bruegelian whirlwind, who would
notice that these palaces and ancient houses are not genuine? For none of these great
buildings is the original erected there in Burgundian times. These are mock façades,
copies of the originals and built not in the late Middle Ages but at the end of the 17th
century and during the 18th after the French Marshal de Villeroi had obliterated their
predecessors on the orders of King Louis XIV during the wars of the League of
Augsburg.
It has been quite common for the great democratic squares and places of northern
Europe to be razed to the ground, flattened, pounded, bombed and shelled in the
course of war, only to rise once more from their own ashes; and this has continued to
happen down the flow of centuries to our own times. Take the city of Arras, for
instance, in the north of France. If you drive along the motorway that links Calais
with Paris, stop off to spend a few minutes in one of that city’s magnificent pair of
adjacent places, or squares, a picturesque slice of the Netherlands set down in the
north of France. Here too, as in the Grote Markt in Brussels, you can feel transported
back to medieval times. Yet in Arras, as in Brussels, the historical setting is a copy, in
this case reproduced after the First World War when the great squares were flattened
by German and British artillery. Examples can easily be multiplied, particularly in the
wake of the Second World War, as anyone who has visited Nuremberg or Munich or
countless other German cities can easily testify.
An interesting question lurks behind this replicated history. I have already suggested a
link between imperfection and political maturity. I wonder whether there is not also a
connection between true democracy, true freedom, and the impermanence of the
models we revere. We do, after all, make a habit of adopting, as symbols of our
heritage, objects whose original manifestation is no longer authentically available.
The British ‘Mother of Parliaments’ is a pseudo-Gothic palace constructed in
Victorian times, the French Assemblée an imitation Greek temple. I am not deriding
the myths associated with these great artefacts. On the contrary, the belief that our
modern democratic culture emerged gradually from profound historic roots is in itself
one of the factors that helps nourish and perpetuate that culture. But we should
recognise myths for what they are: stories and images and artefacts that may not carry
the historic weight we popularly ascribe to them and which have more to say about
the present and future than about the distant past. Just as democracy has continually

3

to renew itself, so perhaps do the historical myths with which we sustain it. It is as
though democracy can only thrive on the sharing-and then perhaps the shearing-of
illusion, and can flourish only on the ruins of permanence.
An alarming thought? Maybe. And I am not advocating the death and destruction of
our great urban centres or a preference for fake architecture. But a genuinely
democratic culture, like the carefully balanced life of an individual human being, is a
fragile thing, the more valuable for the built-in impermanence of everything it
embodies. The French writer, critic and poet Paul Valéry had this to say in the
aftermath of the First World War: ‘Nous autres civilisations, nous savons maintenant
que nous sommes mortelles.’ (‘We civilisations know now that we are mortal.’) This
may sound like a bit of pompous French rhetoric, but it does contain an important
truth, one that was by no means self-evident until that period. For what we can now
see as contributing to the strength and resilience of many of our great European cities
is that they have had to integrate into themselves the notion of death and destruction
which is always potentially lurking there, but at the same time have triumphed over
death and over destruction to become the great metropolitan centres that so many of
them are today.
The historic transformation of Brussels contains further lessons. What business, for
instance, did Louis XIV’s generals have there in 1695? Why did Louis XIV not
remain within the limits of his existing frontiers? Well, he was waging war, as he did
almost throughout his long reign, fighting the rest of Europe in order to try to expand
French frontiers far into the core of the rest of Europe and setting the pace and the
pattern for those kings and dictators who were to follow him. I would even go so far
as to say that there could have been no Hitler, and certainly no Napoleon, if there had
not first been Louis XIV. Like them, he was a little man with a constant need for selfassertion, an aggressive nationalist who played out his bellicosity on an international
stage, hoping to adorn his own capital with the fruits of foreign conquest. Am I too
harsh on the roi soleil? The French learn of the flowering of literature and the arts that
occurred during his reign, and his grandiose palace at Versailles is one of the miracles
of imaginative human construction, a symbol of power comparable to the Pyramids.
But nowhere in the great regal city of Paris, or in its historic suburbs like Versailles or
Fontainebleau, will you find a place as comfortable, as easy to occupy as the Grote
Markt in Brussels. Most of our French squares, or places, are devoted to abstractions
of power rather than to concrete notions, to concrete things. They are allegorical
places, the Place de la Concorde for instance, the Place de la Nation, the Place de la
République, or indeed the Place de la Bastille (once very concrete, something which
had to be pulled down, but of course an abstract symbol ever since).
Paris is a regal city, a royal city, dressed in republican garb. Even the square (or
place) in Paris, the Place de la Concorde, has nothing genuinely popular or democratic
about it. Nowadays, it is for cars, not people. Historically, t was devised in the 18th
century by Louis XV, and at first named after him, as a sort of extension to the
Tuileries, at that time the royal seat of power. By the time of the French Revolution
(after which it was renamed), it formed the stage on which both the king, Louis XVI,
and the radical populist Robespierre were beheaded. Thus both the monarch and the
revolutionary were treated to the same show in that show square, or show-place, of
Paris. After the Revolution, the square was clearly in need of yet another name to
obliterate the memory of the gory events that had taken place there; only then was it

4

christened - of all things -‘Concorde’. The French are very good at renaming places
and creating the illusion that the places themselves are thereby changed. Mind you,
renaming that particular square was evidently not enough. In the 1830s, another king,
the gentle and rather ineffective Louis-Philippe, added something else: an obelisk
brought up the Seine all the way from Egypt. With great difficulty this priceless
ancient monument was raised on the Place de la Concorde and there it stands to this
day, an exotic, oriental talisman erected in a square with a meaningless, abstract name
as though to exorcise by magic the bloody chapter in French history that once
occurred there.
Perhaps the closest Paris ever came to having a ‘popular’ square, Brussels-style, was
in 1790. On 14 July 1790, on the very first anniversary of the storming of the Bastille,
the French came together to celebrate a festival they called the Fête de la Fédération Federation Day, or Federation Festival. They selected the largest of all the places in
Paris, the Champ de Mars, the Field of Mars (there’s an abstraction for a name if ever
there was). Appropriately, this was originally the drilling ground for the military
school the Ecole Militaire that still stands at the southern extremity of this vast square.
The Fête de la Fédération was a strange event. People turned up from all over Paris
and beyond with spades and wheelbarrows and dug up the earth in the centre in an
effort to make the square resemble a Roman stadium: the French Revolution was very
strong on Roman symbolism, and this was after all the Campus Martius.
Huge crowds poured into the Champ de Mars. The king was present. He had no
choice; he had to be there and did his best to look pleased. The queen was there too.
But she was clearly not amused, perhaps because she had to carry the cocarde, the
tricolour badge on her coiffe. Also present was the Marquis de Lafayette who had
recently distinguished himself in the American Revolution. His job was to marshal the
recently created National Guard. The whole show had a look of order, a military look
about it.
Why were they all gathered there? What were they all supposed to be celebrating?
Above all, of course, the first anniversary of the storming of the Bastille. But they
were also celebrating the altogether novel idea of France as a decentralised federation.
Remember that the Assemblée constituante made up of the three orders had gathered
to draw up a new constitution and was making a lot of noise about the idea of political
decentralisation, while the new département were intended to have no representative
of central government supervising their affairs. All this was unprecedented in France.
At no stage in its history had it reached for such a degree of untrammelled political
freedom. The Fête de la Fédération must therefore have been a brief moment of
almost intoxicating optimism. What the people had struggled for was within reach at
last, and perfect political fulfilment within sight. This was the true celebration, and for
this they raised there, right in the midst of the Champ de Mars, an altar on which
Mass was celebrated and oaths solemnly sworn. The Mass was led by Bishop
Talleyrand, surrounded by 300 priests all wearing the tricolour scarf around their
waists. And the oath to the idea of, in effect, a federated, decentralised France was
taken by everyone including the king himself. For a moment, all were united in hope:
Religion, Monarchy and the People.
It was not to last. The Fête de la Fédération and the optimism it engendered were
washed away by relentless rain which turned the Roman stadium into a quagmire. By

5

evening most people were deeply dispirited. Decentralisation, federation - democracy
itself - got stuck in the mud that day, and the revolution took an utterly different
turning, raging on until the king and queen were beheaded.
History might have found fit to stop on that day and turn the Champ de Mars into a
square similar to the Grote Markt in Brussels, where all the emblems of power and
politics could have been reconciled. But this was not to be. Today the Champ de
Mars is simply a jardin à la française, a long, neat quadrangle of dust and grass, a
place for tourists, especially Anglo-Saxon tourists, who turn their backs on the Ecole
Militaire and stare upwards instead at our great Parisian ‘Dame de Fer’, the original
‘Iron Lady’, the Tour d’Eiffel, who took her place at the head of the Champ de Mars
at the halfway point between the Fête de la Fédération and our own day.
It is worth remembering that the great climactic Chartist rally in London in 1848 was
also washed away in a downpour, and this perhaps played its part in ensuring that
Britain would have no revolution in a year that saw the overthrow of so many old
regimes in Europe, including that of poor Louis-Philippe. But we French tend to
think that the British behave much more stoically under rain, that over the centuries
they have learnt to cope with it. And in any case, I suspect British rain helps the parks
and squares to become more grassy.
This is not a trivial point. Consider for a moment the differences between, say, Hyde
Park or Kensington Gardens and the Jardin du Luxembourg in Paris. British parks are
large and green, built and cultivated with a deliberate eye to asymmetry, packed on
sunny summer days with people sprawled informally in every imaginable posture. In
France, the trees are calculatedly equidistant, all of a size, their roots as often as not
carefully protected beneath a standard issue metal grille. Much of the surface between
and around them is not of grass but of grit. And this difference can be repeated
throughout the length and breadth of both countries. Where the British have gardens,
the French have a town square named after a notable date or an elevated concept.
Where the British have greens and commons, the French have landscaping. Where the
British bring the countryside into the towns, the French bring urban planning into
their rural estates.
There is something deliberately external, aggressive, assertive about the way the
French mark the significance of things. Nothing in the recent American or Australian
bicentenary celebrations was quite so bold or brash as, for example, the building of
the Glass Pyramid in the front courtyard of the Louvre. The great landmarks in the
journey towards a democratic culture have been overt, external, explicit, and
remembered as such. Every French child knows how his forebears built barricades,
destroyed buildings, stormed fortresses, took to the streets, rioted among the squares,
palaces and places-and wrote it all up in noble prose. It was as though, being genuine
idealists, the French could never find a space adequate to embody their values. The
British, on the contrary, seem to have undergone a constant process of interiorisation,
the gradual refinement of the game of ‘indoor politics’ practised by players who
would be loath to write down the rules of the game but who pride themselves on being
able to play it to perfection by ear, as it were. There is no equivalent of the Grote
Markt in Paris because our squares are too grandiose, too abstract. The nearest
equivalent in Britain is probably to be found not in Trafalgar Square, but in that
indoor haven of relaxed, classless, generous sociability, the pub.

6

Now that our British and French destinies are increasingly converging within a wider
Europe, how are we to reconcile our two cultures? Of course, we share similar
democratic values, but the paths that have led us there are very different. How will we
accommodate a largely abstract, external, constitutional definition of democracy with
a conception of democracy as a symphony to be played only by those who already
have the music in their heads? It will not be easy. It is hardly likely that the French
will ever take to cricket or even recognise the subtle shadings that differentiate a
cricket pitch from a village green, a park, or a lawn. Nor (I hope) will a family of
Englishmen ever try picnicking in the midst of the Place de la Concorde.
Perhaps we can both learn from the great, sloping Grote Markt in Brussels, where one
can walk and talk and sit and eat and drink and dance and listen to music and buy
flowers, while all the time surrounded by the visible reconciliation of historical
conflict. This is the image that squares best with my conception of the Europe of
1992 and beyond. Here is a daily and nightly Fête de la Fédération, a tangible yet
informal linking of languages and cultures, a fluid, flowing monument to a
multicultural future bounded by the façades of an apparently immutable past.

7

