REITH LECTURES 1989: Beyond the Tunnel of History
Presenter: Jacques Darras
Lecture 2: The Golden Fleece
TRANSMISSION: 29 November 1989 RADIO 4

With all the digging up of data that went on in connection with the bicentenary of the
French Revolution, and the earnest quest for new interpretations of its origins and
significance, it was easy to lose a sense of perspective and to become somewhat
perplexed. That perplexity, however, is nothing new. People, even the sharpest minds,
were often nonplussed at the time. Listen to that enigmatic but imaginative figure the
Marquis de Sade, who said in 1791:
‘J'adore le roi, mais Je déteste les anciens abus; J'aime une
infinité d'articles de la Constitution, d'autres me révolten...Je ne
veux point d'Assemblée nationale, mais deux Chambres, comme en
Angleterre...Que suis-je à présent? Aristocrate ou démocrate? Vous me
le direz, s'il vous plaît, car pour moi Je n'en sais rien’ 
‘I worship the king, yet I loathe the past excesses. I like a large number
of the items in the new constitution, while others revolt me. I do not
want a national assembly; I want two Houses, as they have in England.
What am I at the moment? An aristocrat or a democrat? Please tell me. I
myself can’t tell.’
De Sade was one of the very few prisoners left in the Bastille in the days before it was
stormed by the people of Paris in the summer of 1789. He could hardly claim to have
been an authentic democrat or revolutionary himself, and indeed the Revolution was
to send him back to jail in 1793. Yet he was to play his part in the Revolution in Paris
as a member of the section of ‘piques’, redolent of those real revolutionaries, the
‘sans-culottes’, walking barefoot in the streets of Paris, carrying a pike on top of
which, in image if not always in fact, was the blood-drenched head of a French
aristocrat. De Sade did not go in for this kind of grotesquerie, but he did help a lot of
people fleeing arrest to reach England, and he also tried to stop some of the informing
and false reporting that went on at the time. Indeed, this is why he was again arrested,
jailed in 1793 and sentenced to death on 26 July 1794. In the event, luck was on his
side in the form of the endless red tape with which the Revolution tied its own hands,
and the Marquis de Sade was reprieved-just in time to see the guillotining of the
greatest firebrand of them all, Robespierre, two days later, on the 28th.
Now, you might expect that, being myself a Northerner, and so far as I am aware no
sadean or sadist, I would have a sneaking sympathy for Robespierre, the lawyer from
Arras, a town with which my own name suggests a historical family link. And indeed
it is easy to admire a man who passed from the obscurity of dull, banal provincial life
to the peaks of fame and glory-the very model, almost, of Stendhal’s Julien Sorel.
Personally, however, I have no love whatever for Robespierre, for he represents not
the rise of France but its total downfall. Robespierre lived and died for a brand of
1

almost religious nationalism-a quasi-mystical belief in the nation that led not to the
triumph of the people of France but to the follies and defeats of Napoleon.
The reasons why Robespierre and his ilk shot to prominence at the time of the French
Revolution lie deeply enmeshed in centuries of previous history. Clues lie
everywhere, even in such apparent trivia as his name: his first name – Maximilien.
Maximilien de Robespierre hailed from the minor aristocracy and was named after the
Emperor Maximilien I of Austria. This is the man who, by marrying Marie de
Bourgogne, daughter of Charles the Bold of Burgundy, enabled the Duchy of
Burgundy to survive defeat by the French King Louis XI-and then to become an
Austro-Spanish province. Much of the area that we now think of as the North of
France and its Lowland neighbours spent four brilliant centuries first as the great
Duchy of Burgundy and then as part of the vast, cosmopolitan Habsburg Empire. So
that Arras, the town from which Robespierre came in the North of France where I,
too, have my roots, embodies a cultural legacy far richer than Maximilien de
Robespierre himself acknowledged.
Arras was a major city throughout much of the Middle Ages, one the wealthiest cities
in that part of Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy held court there, an early form of
parliament, as they did in such towns as Lille, Brussels, Tournai, Dijon and Bruges.
That list gives some idea of the extent of the Duchy of Burgundy: it was about the
size of present-day Holland and Belgium, overlapping with them on the map, though
much of it a little further south and west. Burgundy was, in effect, a sovereign state, a
buffer between the great monarchies of early France and England and between them
and the northern outposts of Habsburg power to whom it was later annexed. A great
city like Arras, therefore, stood literally at the crossroads of history. If you visit the
city today and its magnificent twin squares surrounded by their Amsterdam-like
gabled houses, you will see the tangible legacy of an immense past fortune built on
wool trading and arras-making - those famous tapestries or hangings that were used
by all the courts of Europe, and through one of which, if you remember, Prince
Hamlet kills Polonius.
In its great days, when the Duchy of Burgundy was part of the Emperor Maximilien’s
northernmost domains, the city of Arras was very much Flemish or Netherlandish in
outlook and style, and it still retains this aspect today. The prosperity of the city was
only finally arrested in the 18th century as young Maximilien de Robespierre was
growing up, a process greatly accelerated by activities put in train by Robespierre
himself.
When he was in his teens, there was still a hint of the great cultural centre the city of
Arras had once been. As a young man he attended a literary society called the Rosati
(which still exists today) because he had aspirations to become a poet. When only 25
he was elected to the Arras ‘Academie’, the local version of the Academie française
started by Richelieu. Robespierre was elected depute for the province of Artois to the
Etats Generaux, the States General, where people at first derided the young man’s
eloquence and made fun of his accent just as they were to do of other youthful
provincial leaders, like Napoleon from Corsica, Hitler from Austria or Mao Tse-tung
from Hunan. People from northern France, with their Burgundian and Austro-Spanish
cultural roots, had long been regarded as foreigners by the rest of France. This made
the young Robespierre more determined than ever to prove the authenticity of his

2

Frenchness. In this he was a direct spiritual descendant of Louis XIV; you proved
your commitment to France by destroying anything around you that did not qualify.
When French troops took Arras from Spain in the mid-17th century in an expansionist
mood that under Louis XIV was eventually to engulf Brussels, they not only
contributed mightily to the wholesale economic decline of the region but also helped
generate the narrow, national conception of France and its frontiers which was 100
years later to endorsed by the French Revolution. Hence, the endless and bloody
quarrels between Germany and France that were to render the coming of a united
Europe almost impossible, or at least postponed for two more centuries.
This is the extent of my dislike for Robespierre, therefore: he unwittingly represented
the petty French nationalism that flies in the face of the much bigger historical legacy
of Arras and the old Duchy of Burgundy of which the city was once part. And it was
this French nationalism that inhibited, really until our own times, a new reconciliation
of the Latin and German cultures that issued so creatively in the Arras of the
Burgundian dukes and the Austro-Spanish emperors. And if the nationalism of
Robespierre represented a betrayal of the legacy of Arras, an acceptance of the
destructive patriotism of Louis XIV, its shrill cry continued to echo long after his own
death as the nation en armes pursued its doomed campaigns against first the English
and later the Prussians.
It is unfashionable, I know, to interpret the past with the benefit of hindsight, and even
more unfashionable to elevate the medieval past to a status far greater than, say, the
18th-century Enlightenment as a model for the kind of society we are ourselves trying
to erect. You may perhaps cast me as some quixotic knight in search of the Holy Grail
or as a latter-day Jason in pursuit of an unfindable Golden Fleece, a Theseus trying to
slay the Minotaur of European nationalism. As a matter of fact, the Golden Fleece is a
peculiarly appropriate image as it was the symbol adopted to represent Burgundy at
its height in the 15th century at the time of Philippe le Bon, Duke Philip the Good.
Why the Golden Fleece? Well, the immense wealth of Burgundy was based on wool,
the trading of wool and the making and trading of cloth. Think of that perfect picture
the Adoration of the Lamb by the Van Eyck brothers that you can still see in the
cathedral of St Bavon in Ghent. The lamb is there of course for its Christian
symbolism. But it is placed in the centre of the canvas because it also epitomises the
fortune of the country. Look at the lusciousness of the grass carpeted by a rich variety
of local flowers. That mirrors the lusciousness and the gloss of the wool of the lamb,
whose very blood flows beautifully with its rich red colour, as if it were some sort of
Burgundian wine in the very process of transubstantiation. And in the foreground
stand the Elect, pompous, grave, fully fed, fully fleshed, the very cornerstone of
Burgundian success.
Burgundy was no historical backwater. In the 1400s it had a flourishing culture able
to rival the Italian cities of the Renaissance. A real quattrocento of the north was
taking place there, a cultural explosion of astonishing power and range: a polyglot,
polymath, polyphonic and polycentric culture. Polyphony in music, indeed, can stand
as a metaphor for Burgundian culture as a whole, an image of the aspiration towards
the harmonic accommodation of conflicting interests that we nowadays call
democracy. A polyphonic piece of music is the sound equivalent of that great central
square in Brussels we discussed last week, where the demands of the people and the

3

aristocrats, of the dukes and kings and merchants, jostle one another for position
across the reverberant stones of history. This is the essence of the great polyphonic
work of Guillaume Dufay, Gilles Binchois, Jean de Ockeghem and Josquin des Pres Burgundians all, yet men of European culture, influenced by France, Italy and
Germany, composers whose genius fed back in its turn into the mainstream of
European art, through the great Lutheran Masses of Bach and into the symphonic
structures of Romanticism.
If musical polyphony was one aesthetic counterpart to the development of democracy,
another can be seen in the painting that flourished in Burgundy: the delicate
miniatures of the German-born Memling, or the big bold works of the Van Eyck
brothers. The Van Eycks had an irresistible way of bringing the images of the time
across the centuries to us today. The subjects they chose were, as we have already
seen, traditional enough-Jesus on the Cross, the Lamb of God, the Virgin Mary, and
so on. But just as the lamb would also become a symbol of the wool on which
Burgundian wealth was based, so they would drape the body of the Virgin, for
example, in colourful Burgundian cloth, luscious, soft and velvety rather as a fashion
designer of our own times, a Christian Lacroix, will indulge his personal whim when
dressing his women. All ranks and stations of life appear there in the paintings of
Burgundy. Women were there in their own right; not just as dubious emblems of
national virginity or in military guise, like Joan of Arc, but also as themselves, as the
mothers and daughters and sisters and lovers, the workers and the homemakers and
the cooks. For remember that, in addition to painting and music, you have cooking,
almost as revered an art. We are in the historical home of those rich, red Burgundy
wines with deep poetic names such as Nuits St Georges or Vosne-Romanee, and the
cooks at the court of Burgundy were highly trained in the subtle art of creating winebased sauces. There is a word in French, liant, which dictionaries translate as
suppleness or pliability. The liant is the ‘X’ factor which makes that rich Burgundian
sauce cohere, which literally ‘links up’ its various ingredients to make it flow so
beautifully and smoothly.
This was a culture that looked for wider connections, that linked the apparently
separate, that flowed freely beyond its own natural confines. You find liant - very
literally - in the work of the Van Eyck brothers, who were among the first to use
linseed oil in painting, to make the paint flow more easily and to dry less fast. And the
Burgundians had liant also in the field of diplomacy, in politics, where, for example,
Duke Philip the Good for 40 years managed to benefit Burgundian interests by
integrating them with the seesaw rivalries of the French and the English.
If I had been born in Burgundian times, in 1439 instead of 1939, though at the same
place near Crecy on the very borders of the French kingdom and the Duchy of
Burgundy, I would have had a real choice of cultures available to me: Burgundian (or
Flemish), English and French. Perhaps I would have followed the example of the
chronicler and poet Jean Froissart, who was to write in French for the English court
and whose ‘Chronicles’ tell among other things of the epic Battle of Crecy in one of
the most vivid and brilliant pieces of early descriptive journalism. The French would
have labelled me a traitor for my pains, for Crecy was the scene of one of the great
English victories. But of course that fate may still befall me. After all, the reason I
have been dwelling on the history and culture of late medieval Burgundy is not, of
course, as a mere academic or antiquarian exercise.

4

You will have understood, I am sure, that the Burgundy of Philip the Good, that
obscure duchy that few nowadays can place with confidence on a map and on which
there are very few books, certainly in French, is for me a wonderful model of the kind
of multicultural Europe that I feel we have once more within our grasp five-and-a-half
centuries later. If we ate to face the future with confidence, we must face the past with
honesty. Burgundy was not a minor provincial outpost of France, or a mere step on
the road to the eventual independence of Belgium in the 1830s. The Bruges or
Brussels or Liege or Arras of the 1400s would have been a great cultural metropolis.
And this is why I cannot help feeling frustrated when I see that marvellous city of
Bruges being used as a platform from which to launch a crusade to retain the old
nationalisms of Europe, as though we had not yet overcome, or moved beyond, the
cataclysmic tragedies that European nationalism produced. In Burgundian times,
Bruges was the most cosmopolitan of centres, full of artists and artisans, merchants
and bankers speaking various languages, some coming from Italy or down from
Germany and all gathering there under the wise guidance of Duke Philip the Good. If
Bruges was prosperous at the time, it was precisely because it was multilingual,
because it was multicultural, because it patronised the arts and could spread its music
and its painting, its wines and its wools all over the known world.
So forgive me if I dote on that almost mythical land of Burgundy as an antidote to the
sour grapes of nationalism. In Arras as early as the 13th century, there was founded
one of the first Guilds of Poets, and these poets enjoyed the patronage of the Count of
Artois and also that of some of the wealthier merchants of the city of Arras. They
celebrated love, wrote fearfully of death, and elected annual princes of poets rather as
the city elected its mayors. And the poetry of these medieval Burgundian minstrels
forms the very cornerstone of the French, Flemish and English poetry of subsequent
centuries. Its echoes ring down across the ages to the songs of Jacques Prevert or
Jacques Brel.
One of my tasks - my pleasures - in recent years has been to try to reweave this
thread, this liant, linking the vibrant cultural pluralism of medieval Burgundy to the
re-emerging European culture of our own times-to help weave anew, perhaps, the
Golden Fleece of Philip the Good while not losing sight of the complex warp and
woof of subsequent history. This is a delicate matter, one for which neither
Robespierres nor de Sades are called for. The aggressive nationalism of the populist
lawyer, no less than the enlightened indecisiveness of the cynical aristocrat, has little
place in the new Europe now emerging. I would rather tunnel further back for models
of the future - reculer pour mieux sauter - and look to the Duchy of Burgundy for
inspiration. The creators of the new, larger Burgundy require a touch of English
humour, a sprinkling of French wit, a dose of Flemish truculence and, above all, an
imaginative and tolerant dedication to the polyphony of a genuinely democratic
culture.

5

