REITH LECTURES 1989: Beyond the Tunnel of History
Presenter: Jacques Darras
Lecture 4: Remembering the Somme
TRANSMISSION: 13 December 1989 RADIO 4

The north for a Frenchman usually means north of Paris. It extends from Porte de la
Chapelle, our Whitechapel if you like, all the way to Norway, where by some climatic
and climactic transmutation it suddenly becomes the ‘Great North’. If you’re a French
driver, you’ve left Paris for a couple of hours, you’ve been driving for some time up
north in a sort of haze and daze—then, all of a sudden, you see a reindeer cross the
road! This is where for a Frenchman north becomes Great North. The real north is
where the reindeer start crossing the road; the local, ordinary ‘north’ is of little
interest. This is to say, the French are mainly Mediterranean, if not all by birth at least
by choice, by history, by orientation. And, I want to suggest, by a kind of collective
amnesia.
Being a northerner myself, I am usually regarded by my Mediterranean compatriots
with first a sense of commiseration, then as a strange species living halfway between
Porte de la Chapelle—Whitechapel—and Lapland. There is a French phrase which,
literally translated, says that one sometimes has ‘lost the north’, ‘perdu le nord’,
which means that one has become mad. ‘North by north-west,’ as Hamlet said to
Polonius. Well, in my view, France must have been mad for some time, since it ‘lost
the north’ some six centuries ago. The north is largely banished from French history
and tradition, screened from view, furthermore, by the 19th-century mountains of
ashes and coal as well as by the pseudo- romantic 20th-century propaganda of
Nazism. ‘The Germans,’ you will still hear Frenchmen say dismissively, ‘are
Northerners.’
The north I come from is an area of France that has been twice forgotten by
Frenchmen, who want the north either black (the coal mine and Nazi ideology) or
white (Arctic snow and reindeer). But I come from a region made up of flat,
expansive fertile fields turned yellow every summer by wheat and barley. There is
nothing much to be seen there except a skyline towards which one infinitely
progresses while not moving a single inch.
It is hard to understand, too, why these immense, open fields should have been one of
the areas on earth most defaced by war. Where there are no natural barriers men have
raised them and fought over them. This has frequently been the fate of the little River
Somme, which flows calmly in its narrow bed for a mere 90 miles from St-Quentin to
the sea and yet which has witnessed centuries of military manoeuvring as well as
some of the goriest set-piece massacres in history.
During the Hundred Years War, the Somme was crossed and recrossed countless
times: by the French cavalry, or by the English archery of Edward III or by Henry V
benefiting from local informers on the best fords. Froissart, the Flemish chronicler of
English kings, has a vivid description of the engineers of the English army traipsing

1

along the winding banks of the Somme, sounding the depth of the water here and
there for a possibility of passage.
The most colourful episode of all is surely the meeting between the French and
English monarchs at Picquigny in 1485, arranged by the cunning Louis XI in order to
bring the Hundred Years War to an end. That episode is told by another chronicler of
northern origin, Commynes (named after a little Burgundian town now in Belgium).
According to Commynes, Louis XI had the meeting take place halfway across the
Somme on a bridge made of boats, having first set up a trellised partition through
which he addressed King Edward IV of England, as if not wanting to catch the germs
of his adversary. One can imagine the two kings walking across water to talk to each
other through the trellis above the river: what a perfect image of the absurd
artificiality to which nations resort in their anxiety to establish frontiers. Not that
France or England were yet nations in the modern sense. There were no real national
frontiers at that time; towns situated in the war zone could veer daily from one side to
the other. Then, over the centuries, frontiers gradually hardened and hostility grew
apace.
The Somme became almost professionally associated with war. This is where the
French kings built their fortresses, set up garrisons, and recruited their infantry. This
is where English, French and German troops met and performed their bloody rituals
again and again, as if locked into a permanent theatre of war. And the greatest
military show of all, a mutual massacre of awesome scale, they performed —perhaps
we should say committed—in the summer months of 1916: the Battle of the Somme.
This at least is its name in Britain. Ironically enough, the Somme means little to the
French, on whose territory the battle took place. For most Frenchmen the north begins
at the gateways of Paris, and the Somme is merely a river somewhere between Paris
and the Channel. It is in Britain, not France, that the Somme means a battle. This was
very well illustrated when, a few years ago, we had students from the University of
Sheffield at the University of Picardy, over on an exchange. Ours had gone to
Sheffield to study drama (we have few good drama departments on our campuses,
which may help to explain the appalling lack of good new drama in France these
days). The Sheffield students, for their part, were paying the return visit in order to
study film and cinema. They wanted to make a video; I told them that the first place
we would visit for the shooting of the film would be the Somme. Good, they
exclaimed. We’ve just done the War Poets. This is perfect fieldwork—perfect
battlefield work. I was sorry to disappoint them, but I had to say no. When the French
talk of the Somme, they mean the river.
We French sometimes display a dangerous tendency to forget about the First World
War. It is true that to French ears the word Verdun conjures up something of the
massive slaughter of the trenches rather as the Somme does to British. But whereas
the Great War can still evoke in Britain a sense of tragic waste, of heroic loss, a
glimpse of what might have been, in France that war is regarded—if at all—as a
meaningless massacre, an absurdity in which two armies exterminated each other
without gaining an inch of ground. It is dismissed as pointless, is disregarded, and
ultimately largely forgotten. The Somme is thus a frontier of the mind—one might
almost say that it is where France ends and Britain begins. The road that runs from
Albert to Bapaume, then on to Arras and Lens, northeast of Amiens, virtually cuts

2

through one vast cemetery for 50 kilometres or more. Here are buried—by the
hundred or by the thousand—Scots and Welshmen, New Zealanders and Australians,
Canadians and Ulstermen, Chinese and Indians, Englishmen from the north,
Englishmen from the south. The cemeteries are of various shapes and sizes. Some are
just neat rows of crosses or of identical stone tombs surrounded by sloping green
swards dotted by the occasional cluster of poppies. Here and there, an exotic cedar or
spruce shadows the graves. These great plots of peace are almost invisible in the
midst of huge expanses of French farmland that once resounded with the ceaseless
clamour of mechanised destruction. Except for the locals tending the wheat and barley
that nod in the breeze in the summertime, the French rarely stop along this route. It is
as though we were living a collective amnesia. Already by the time the Second World
War erupted, indeed, the French at least had almost wilfully forgotten the First. If the
French talk about war at all, it is to the humiliation of the Second World War rather
than the carnage of the First that they tend to return.
There are many reasons why the Second World War casts a darker shadow than the
First. Millions now alive were directly affected. The war was fought over fundamental
moral issues of good and evil, and the entire future of humanity has been radically
touched by its two apocalyptic events: the mass murder of Jews and the dropping of
the atomic bomb. For the first time in history what was at stake in a sort of worldwide
Darwinian conflict was the moral and even physical survival not just of the fittest but
of mankind per se: far more weighty matters even than those raised by the waters of
the Somme.
However, the Second World War in no way solved or dissolved the problems raised
by the First and, if it is possible to think our way back through Auschwitz and
Hiroshima to Verdun and the Somme, it is to the issues of 1914-18 that I wish to
return. For these, I believe, have just as great a relevance to the new Europe we are
struggling to create. This is a controversial view, I know, particularly in France where
World War I remains a dangerously silent minefield for the incautious historian. But I
am a man of the Somme, born and bred on the fields of battle and used to picking my
way through the minefields of history.
The First World War was primarily a conflict concerning frontiers. It arose from—
and helped to perpetuate—complex issues of nationalism, of national frontiers, of
national self-determination and sovereignty, all of which lie at the heart of today’s
debate about the Europe of tomorrow. The Second, by contrast, was about systems of
ideas: Fascism, Communism, and the need of nations to work together to defeat evil.
In both wars, the fate of Europe was at stake. French neglect of the First World War
may be understandable. The massacres of Picardy and Flanders were almost too brutal
to think about, and a certain communal amnesia was perhaps inevitable. But it
contributed, I think, to the total lack of preparedness in France to face war again in
1939 and 1940. You may not like to think about the catastrophe you have had to
endure; but ignoring it does not help equip you to avoid another.
There is a deeper reason, though, over and above the sheer horror of the war of the
trenches, why the French tend to ignore the First World War. We pride ourselves on
being a literary nation. Anything major in our history had, by definition, to be
immortalised by great writers, particularly poets. But who of note wrote of World
War I? If there is a literary tradition arising out of the death and destruction along the

3

Somme, it is not French but British: Siegfried Sassoon, Wilfred Owen, Isaac
Rosenberg, Ivor Gurney and the rest, poets whose names mean little in France. Not
only were they not French, they also rubbed salt into a peculiarly French wound: that
of the French artistic talent meaninglessly wasted by the war—Charles Péguy,
Jacques Rivière, Alain Fournier, Gaudier-Brzeska, etc. According to my teachers in
Paris, no major work of art in any field had been produced by the war, with possible
exceptions like the love poems of Apollinaire, Barbusse’s Under Fire or Céline’s
Journey to the End of the Night (though this was more a general indictment on the
century’s materialism than a response to the First World War as such).
The real artistic movement of the period— modernism—had nothing to do with the
First World War and indeed predated its outbreak by several years. Already, Picasso
and Braque were experimenting with cubism while Matisse and Kandinsky were
freeing colour from line. Stravinsky followed the lead of Debussy, adding savage
rhythmic vitality to subtle orchestral texture, while the Dadaists in Zurich were taking
poetry in directions unimaginable to the 19th-century formalists against whom they
were rebelling. Thus to the French, the war, when it came in 1914, was, in aesthetic
terms at least, an almost supernumerary event breaking out anachronistically after the
real upheaval had already taken place. It would certainly uproot lives, but it added no
ideas.
The modernism so dominant in France had left England almost untouched. England
was an island fortress of tradition that not even a crusading American like Ezra
Pound, bent on catching up with progress in art, had managed to budge. Standing
aloof from aesthetic movements on the Continent, England’s most revered literary
figures, such as Thomas Hardy or Arnold Bennett, continued to write in an essentially
19th century tradition, as though oblivious of the surge of modernism flowing all
around them. Much the same was true in other arts. Elgar, Hoist and Vaughan
Williams did not learn much from Debussy or Ravel, nor Stanley Spencer or Walter
Sickert as much as they might from Braque and Picasso. And nor did the War Poets
seem touched by Rimbaud or Mallarmé. So how should they be judged? Not an easy
question for a young Frenchman to answer when I first faced it in my graduate
dissertation 30 years ago. As war heroes? Surely not. As artists? Well, it may have
sounded unappreciative of a foreigner to say so, but I could not resist the thought that
they were prized above all as martyred bastions of anti-modernism.
This is where France and England part company in their assessment of art. The
French incline to analyse their artists in the context of the aesthetic movements of
which they formed a part; the English, more emotionally, love to link an artist’s life to
his art (hence the great success of literary biographies in the English-speaking world).
And what could be more emotion-laden than a group of talented poets who wrote, and
in some cases died, on a foreign field of battle? But what about art? How does their
poetry compare—not just with that of their continental contemporaries, but with the
more innovative English language models available to them, such as the work of
Gerard Manley Hopkins or Ezra Pound? And was not T.S. Eliot in his Waste Land to
bury them with more compassion than they could master in their own fight for
survival? ‘The poetry is in the pity,’ exclaimed Wilfred Owen in one of his most
memorable pronouncements. Yet I cannot help detecting in Owen and the others a
plea to the reader, not only for sympathy for their plight as warriors, but also for pity
towards the inevitable inadequacies of the poetry itself. To the French, even Hell can

4

be exciting—as long as it is a modern Hell. Let’s call Hitler, for instance, a revamped
version of Satan or Dr Faustus. The English, on the contrary, seem to have entered
this century reluctantly, walking backwards, as it were, clinging to Wordsworthian
dreams of splendour in the grass, intimation of immortality which are best reflected
for them in the insular, pre-modernist bucolic romanticism of the War Poets.
In this light, it becomes easier to see why the Somme means so much more to the
British than to the French. It is not only that the French, for their own often
disreputable reasons, have chosen to ignore World War I almost from the moment of
its conclusion. In addition, the British have very strong reasons to remember that war
and to envelop it in a cloud of neo-romantic nostalgia.
As the 20th century approaches its end we seem, at last, to be in sight of sloughing off
the baneful legacy of the two world wars by which it was so disfigured, emerging
from a long period of frozen history, of frozen values. As the walls that divided
Eastern and Western Europe are dismantled, an era of limitless new possibilities
opens up. Yet also of new questions, new doubts.
Is there not, for example, a fundamental irony in developments on the two sides of the
old Iron Curtain? After all, the countries in the West have been trying to remove some
of the inhibiting barriers that lie between them, just as those in the East are
rediscovering their national differences. If the whole of Europe, and not just the West,
is eventually to inhabit Mr Gorbachev’s Common European Home, what kind of
accommodation can be found for the fissiparous national cultures to which his freeing
of the reins has given such a fillip? Perhaps events in Eastern Europe contain lessons
for us in the West. Are we in Western Europe in danger of losing part of our valuable
and varied cultural heritage in the process of easing the economic links between us?
Perhaps genuine freedom—as so many are asserting in Eastern Europe and as we
ourselves used to assert a century ago—is best embodied in the proper maintenance of
nationhood based on a common culture. These arguments have strong appeal to those
on the political right in France, Britain and elsewhere. To which the committed
European replies that he wants to create a larger nation out of nations that for so long
used to war with one another. But then one may wonder if by doing so, Western
nations are not unwittingly fusing together explosive elements from both World War I
and World War II: grafting the nationalism of 1914 and Versailles on to the spirit of
wartime co-operation that later followed in the form of Nato and the Warsaw Pact.
We live in a privileged time, a watershed in history that invites or obliges us to
rethink our identity and redefine notions about politics, sovereignty and the nation
state that we have been in danger of taking for granted. The Somme is in many ways a
good place to start. For centuries, this part of Europe was the most criss-crossed
network of commercial routes and fairs, the liveliest area for human exchanges before
the blight of nationalism set in and the fighting which accompanied it.
We have to recross the Somme, back through its history, asking questions as we go:
why is it, for example, that the concept of the ‘nation’, once largely linguistic and
cultural in meaning, came to freeze into territorial units? We have to ask whether the
idea of the nation is not in contradiction to that of democracy, and whether the boost
to nationalism that emanated from the French Revolution was in the long run really so
beneficial. Why is it that the concept of democracy is only applied within political

5

regimes and not across them? What effects on sovereignty would be incurred by the
genuine application of democracy across national boundaries? Historically,
democratic nations have often themselves been nationalistically expansive and
military—taking their cue, perhaps, from the French Revolution, which in the name of
the people, cried ‘Vive la nation!’ placed the people under arms, and embarked upon
an imperialistic rampage across the map of Europe. France and Britain, pioneers of
democracy, went on to be the great colonial conquerors.
In other words, the notion of sovereignty seems to have been linked with the old
feudal notion of territoriality. It is as if our modern democratic nation states had
blindly and unconsciously carried along into the modern age those feudal notions with
them—worsening their effects immeasurably by coupling them with the notion of a
‘democratic’ army. All this culminated in the First World War, a mass slaughter
which brought together the essentially medieval idea of territoriality, 19th- century
nationalism and the emerging concept of mass democracy. Those cold, dead bodies,
lying in their half-forgotten graves, what bearing should they have, or do they have,
on the Europe of today and tomorrow? Did those poor soldiers die believing in
national frontiers that are soon to be lifted? Or did they die precisely in order that their
eventual descendants might raise those barriers and thus avoid such internecine
slaughter in the future?
If we can come up with imaginative answers to questions such as these, answers
appropriate for a future beyond memory of two world wars, then perhaps the men
lying beneath the crosses of the Somme might not have died in vain. We owe it to
them, and to ourselves, therefore, to recross that small Rubicon of the north. For rivers
are but barriers in the mind.

6

