REITH LECTURES 1989: Beyond the Tunnel of History
Presenter: Jacques Darras
Lecture 3: Highways of Freedom
TRANSMISSION: 6 December 1989 RADIO 4

I was born on the eve of World War II in the village of Bernay on the edge of the
forest of Crécy in northern France, not far from the Channel. Crécy is where, in 1346,
the armies mustered and, mastered by the Black Prince and his father King Edward
Ill, defeated the pride and arrogance of the French cavalry. This proved to be the
opening of what I think of as the Six Hundred Years War (rather than the Hundred
Years War), a series of international conflicts that only came to an end with the defeat
of Hitlerism, in 1945. During World War II, the forest of Crécy, my forest, contained
the launching-pads for the German V1s.
My father was made a prisoner by the Germans in early spring 1940 and worked in a
labour camp in Silesia. When he was released, a rather bitter and frustrated man, my
parents decided to start a new life together, to move further inland. So I, at the age of
six, left the sea and the forest; and I missed them both very much. I had to adjust to a
new geography, a landscape of plateaux and open fields, running away infinitely to
the sky, with here and there the spire of a church. That adjustment took time. I
remember that two things in particular sustained my spirits. First, there was my new
village school. Normally, French provincial schools were housed in standard Third
Republic brick buildings, but the school in this village had been destroyed by German
bombing. The only building left which could house a school was a disused country
château, or manor house, protected by tall lime and linden trees echoing with the song
of wood-pigeons, the cuckoo and blackbirds. So the school was moved into that
magnificent building, and this is where I spent much of my childhood and where I
acquired the aristocratic dreams and republican learning that led me to poetry.
The second thing that meant so much to me in those days was the highway which
passed the gates of the château: the main road from the Channel ports to Paris.
Sometimes, having nothing to do on a Sunday afternoon and becoming bored, I would
go to the edge of the highway to watch the cars roll by. The cars that sent me
dreaming most were those which carried a GB plate, the old Morrises and Austins.
These cars were exotic because they carried whole families venturing over from a
foreign land. Sometimes, these families would stop by the roadside, open flasks of tea
and eat little V-shaped—V for victory, I presumed—white bread sandwiches, while
speaking an incomprehensible tongue. In my eyes, those foreigners had prestige,
because they had movement: they were the new aristocrats, because they had the right
of passage, the right of way.
In a sense, those British tourists were the mid-2Oth-century equivalents of those
privileged travellers of the 18th and 19th centuries who went on the grand tour. Ever
since the 18th century, down to contemporary authors like the late Bruce Chatwin,
mobility seems to me to have been an in-built value of British civilisation. In this
sense, at least, I would suggest that Britain is far more European than many of its

1

continental counterparts. I think I already sensed this as a child when I observed that
what had been an upper-class preserve was now, before my youthful eyes, becoming
democratised. I watched these newly motorised people with the privilege of mobility.
I wanted to join them.
Freedom is never genuine without the right and the opportunity to move about freely.
Countries that prevent or restrict their citizens from moving in and out cannot be said
to be truly free—a point the East Germans have recently been so eloquently
demonstrating to the world. I was already developing this notion of freedom as a
child, watching by the side of the road, dreaming all the time of extending my
personal freedom.
The French, unlike the British, seem to me to have been very slow in learning to
move, tardy in learning freedom, reluctant to move in space, preferring to stick to
their own roots, like the good peasants they always were—except, perhaps, as part of
marching armies, tramping aggressively across the map of Europe under the banner of
the French monarch, the Revolution or Napoleon. The French have always been very
conservative, as well as territorial, in their regard for that quintessentially Gallic
concept of l’espace - the nature of the overall space and of the spatial subdivisions
that we inhabit. Consider, for example, the ambiguous legacy of the French
Revolution. On the one hand, it purported to facilitate business and trade by
nationalising our system of weights and measures, introducing the metre (and relating
it to the circumference of the earth), and pulling down in the name of commerce all
the local privileges and taxes that hampered the production and flow of goods and
services under the ancien régime. All fine and good. But at the same time, the
revolutionaries drew the map of France itself in a new way, carving it up into little
cells of land called départements, each with a central town called a chef-lieu that
could be reached within a single day from its outer limits by anybody—peasant,
bourgeois or nobleman—riding a horse. All this led to the locking up of space in so
many little parcels or cells. Still worse, to my mind, it was those same revolutionaries
who really tied the concept of sovereignty to that of nation, to that of a national space,
a strict set of frontiers for which henceforth every French citizen had to be prepared to
die. ‘Vive la nation!’ cried the soldiers at Valmy, as they placed their caps proudly on
the upturned tips of their swords.
Let me not be too critical of my compatriots. For the British, too, have equated
nationalism and territory—aided in their case by geography. Britain is an island, or
rather, a set of islands, not only physically, but in many ways psychologically as well.
I think I knew this, or sensed it, all those years ago, through my envious admiration of
their inhabitants’ cross-Channel mobility; if the insular British could take then ‘GB’
cars and their little sandwiches across the frontiers of the map, when would I he able
to emulate them? I certainly did not imagine then that I would live to see the eventual
digging of a tunnel beneath the Channel, to link France and England—a massive
extension of that principle of freedom on which Europe was built and which, in time,
should help end centuries of misunderstanding and hostility between the two
countries.
The idea of a Channel tunnel dates back at least as far as 1802, to a brief respite in the
chronic war between Britain and France brought about by the Treaty of Amiens. That
tunnel was proposed by a French engineer called Albert Matthieu. He did not get far.

2

One can easily imagine Napoleon’s reaction (or Pitt’s!) to such a project. But the idea
tunnelled on and, 50 years later, at the climax of British industrial glory, the great
engineers of the day argued the benefits of laying a tube of steel on the bottom of the
Channel. Queen Victoria herself approved of the idea apparently advised to do so by
Prince Albert. But Lord Pairnerston remonstrated with the Prince, saying: ‘You would
be of a different mind if you had been born on this island!’ At this, the project was (as
it were) grounded. Evidently, one had to be a Continental to feel elated by the
prospect of the tunnel!
Now, another 140 years on, the Channel tunnel idea is irreversible. Interestingly, the
French, despite their rational, space-bound conception of nation that dates from the
Revolution, seem to have been more consistently in favour of the tunnel in recent
years than the historically more free-flowing British. The idea of a great technological
link between our two countries has long been accepted in France and I think the
French are psychologically prepared now for a closer physical union with Britain.
Rather, the debate in France has been on the impact the tunnel will have on the wider
space we inhabit, the space of France, as well as that of the rest of Western Europe.
What facilities, what benefits, are going to derive from the opening of that tunnel?
People are asking. What are the wider opportunities it might help create?
In France, cities—whole areas—have pulled together to try to ensure that the new
tunnel-related motorways and TGV (our bullet train) railway lines will go through
them and link them to what they see as a vast new hinterland. For the French,
particularly up and down the whole eastern portion of the country, being left out is
widely seen as tantamount to economic suicide. The city of Amiens, for example,
where I teach, is almost wearing mourning these days for having been bypassed by
the TGV. It is as if we were back in the Third French Republic, when every small
village wanted to have its own railway line. They used to call that the ‘electoral
railway’.
Some claim the greatest beneficiaries of the tunnel will eventually be the magical
southern triangle of Montepellier, Barcelona and Toulouse in the south, (which would
be a sad irony for people living in northern France and south-east England). Others
wonder whether, for example, Strasbourg will be weakened by the existence of the
tunnel in its rivalry against Brussels for the location of the ultimate capital of Europe.
Then again, will the harbours of Boulogne, Calais and Dunkirk be forced to team up
in order to survive the competition from the ports of Rotterdam or Antwerp?
Questions such as these require answers that go far beyond the tidy spatial
conceptions of the Enlightenment or the supposedly rational political subdivisions of
19th century nationalism.
Developments in Western and Eastern Europe alike are throwing into the melting-pot
the old national territorialities of earlier history and creating a new mobility—and thus
new freedoms—for all Europeans. I think that we French are genuinely excited at the
new European geography that is taking shape. It is as though France were discovering
a new breathing-space beyond the bloody fields of Verdun, and the thin, vulnerable
line of the Vosges mountains, and thus could afford at last to breathe in space—or, to
put it another way, to breathe in space. There is one thing that is obvious: a new game
is being played at our door and we are the actors, we have to be the actors. Personally,
lam exhilarated by this new mobility of people and goods and ideas between and

3

across the great centres of Europe. How could I think otherwise? I, who as a child in
Occupied France, my father in a labour camp in Silesia, listened surreptitiously and
illegally with my mother to the thrilling sound of Winston Churchill’s vigorous
speeches and de Gaulle’s la voix de Ia France crackling to us across the Channel.
Freedom, in my mind, was something available not far away; a dangerous game, hard
to reach or to receive, but all the more exciting for that.
Our little village of Bernay lies between Montreuil and Abbeville, at the bottom of a
sharp valley through which flows the little river Maye. There, as a child, I used to
visit a huge farmhouse of white stone, where my mother bought eggs and butter and
which had formerly been an inn. You can still see it today, with its white gables, its
ivy-woven façade, its large yard and its stables waiting vacantly for the now dead
sound of horses’ hooves. When I was a youngster, the horse still helped plough and
harvest the fields, and provided for me a direct link with past centuries when
stagecoaches plied along that route between Calais and Paris. When my grandparents
were born, stagecoaches would have changed horses every 24 kilometres at special
inns. The inn at Bernay was one such: a famous stage in its time on the road to Paris.
Among its distinguished guests and customers it could number Laurence Stern,
Tobias Smollett and Victor Hugo—and, some said, the Emperor Napoleon himself.
Sterne, in The Sentimental Journey, and Smollett, in Peregrine Pickle, have amusing
part-autobiographical episodes set in Bernay, as I was to discover many years later
when I came to read their books. Famous writers such as these, and other grand
tourists, would stop there overnight en route to Paris, and thence to the South, perhaps
to Italy. They would flirt with the pretty chambermaids at the inn, chasing them
through the passages and corridors, and go on their way the next morning. To my
mind, these men were nomads of liberty, sowing their wild oats as they moved easily
between one European culture and the next.
I must have breathed in some of that air when as a child I visited that inn by the side
of the road in the middle of the war, and I consider myself lucky to have been placed
by chance in that very place at that very time. This is the only way I can think
positively of the notion of ‘spirit of place’. The only spirit of place for me lies in the
place having being passed through, lived through, in total freedom of mind and being.
Isn’t it, after all, the very essence of all literature? For reading is moving, reading is
travelling, reading is making one’s home in movement. The only nations I tolerate are
books!
Next week, I shall continue my personal grand tour, and I hope you will accompany
me to the banks of the Somme—the rivet that witnessed the opening and the closing
of what I like to call the Six Hundred Years War. And I will try to suggest that in that
part of northern France we may find a vital clue to the European future which we will
all share.

4

