REITH LECTURES 1990: The Persistence of Faith
Presenter: Jonathan Sacks
Lecture 5: Fundamentalism
TRANSMISSION: 12 December 1990 - Radio 4

For some reason, religious conviction in the modern world produces in us a mixture
of surprise, fascination and fright, as if a dinosaur had come to life and lumbered
uninvited into a cocktail party. I remember, three years ago, taking part in a panel on
the use of bad language in broadcasting. Everyone else addressed the subject of
obscenity. I was asked to speak about blasphemy. No one had given blasphemy much
thought for many years. The one exception - Mary Whitehouse’s prosecution of Gay
News - seemed to be just that: a stray pebble tossed into a sea of calm indifference.
At the time, I quoted T S Eliot who believed that blasphemy was no longer possible.
He thought that you could only blaspheme if you profoundly believed in the reality of
that which you profaned. No one, according to Eliot, believed that strongly any more.
Along with faith, blasphemy too had died.
Few of us could have imagined that, within a few months, The Satanic Verses would
make blasphemy front-page news throughout the world and that 18 people would die
in religious protests about a novel. Here was religious belief very much alive in the
way the Bible had once portrayed the presence of God: a whirlwind shattering rocks
and uprooting the cedars of Lebanon, fascinating in its power, terrifying in its
destructiveness. It was the hurricane our weather forecasters failed to predict. Why
did the resurgence of religion take us by surprise? And how shall we react to it? We
lamented the loss of faith. Shall we fear its rediscovery still more?
One picture dominated our understanding of religion in the modern world. Faith was
being ousted from one room after another of its once stately home. Science
investigated nature, history explored the past, businesses maximised profits,
technology increased control and governments mediated conflicts, all outside the
sacred canopy of faith. Religions might still be true, but they had lost what Peter
Berger called their plausibility structure, their objective embodiment in society. Faith
might remain a private consolation, but it could hardly govern the public domain.
The priest, guardian of the sacred, was left stranded, the last amateur in a world of
professionals, the last practitioner of the unquantifiable. For healing, we would prefer
a doctor; for catharsis, a psychotherapist. Welfare and education had been transferred
to the state. And prayer had become what one churchman recently described as a list
of ultimatums given to God when all other avenues had been exhausted. The human
imagination would still need the narratives that explained ourselves to ourselves. But
art and drama long ago declared their independence from religion. Wherever the man
of God turned, he found someone else already doing his job. Religion was the
ineffable become the unemployable.

1

None of this meant that the great religions were about to be eclipsed. But it meant that
some hard bargaining would have to take place. Faith no longer had its mansion.
Could it negotiate for itself at least a modest apartment in the tower of Babel? And if
so, which of its now cumbersome furniture would it have to throwaway?
So began the varied strategies of religious liberalism and modern orthodoxy. Religion
would concede the loss of its empire. It would grant independence to the vast domains
of knowledge and decision where once it had been the colonial power. But it would
reserve some restricted territory for itself: as a mode of experience, or the voice of
conscience, or a spring to social action, or as some immediate, self-contained, even
mystical way of knowing. The very powerlessness of religion might be its salvation.
In Hamlet’s words, it could be bounded in a nutshell and still count itself king of
infinite space.
We can hardly understand religious reactions to modernity without appreciating the
extent to which scientific rationalism seemed to carry all before it. From Hume and
Voltaire onward, religious belief became a subject of ridicule and disdain. It was
primitive, irrational, an opiate, a neurosis, an illusion for those who could not face
reality. Some form of accommodation seemed necessary: the only way to recover
self-respect. Modernity had won the battle, and religion had to salvage what it could
from defeat.
Here and there, there might be groups still untouched by the process-rural
communities, the American Bible Belt, the Jewish townships of Eastern Europe.
Some might even opt out of it altogether, like the Hassidim, the Jewish mystical
circles of Eastern Europe. But that meant strict withdrawal, enclosed communities
and a sectarian form of religious organisation. There might be occasional revivals, as
there were in Victorian Britain and, periodically, in America. But these were no more
than lingering pools left by the outgoing tide. Churches and synagogues had either to
make their peace with secular values, as they did in America, or lose adherents, as
they did in England. Either way, religion had lost its power to shape societies. It had
become the sacred facade of an increasingly secular social order. By the close of the
19th century, Oscar Wilde was already calling religion the fashionable substitute for
belief. Preachers were left to lament the ‘melancholy, long-withdrawing roar’ of the
retreating sea of faith. Even the unexpected appearance among students in the 1960s
of mysticisms, cults and countercultural movements was no more than a minor
parenthesis in the larger proposition.
But it was just then that observers began to detect something else. In 1965, Charles
Liebman published an article on orthodoxy in American Jewish life. Until then, it had
been assumed that Jewish Orthodoxy was in a state of terminal decline. As Jews
arrived in America, they set foot on the escalator of acculturation and left their
religious baggage behind. The second and third generations joined progressively
more liberal congregations, if they identified religiously at all. Now, for the first time,
Liebman’s article drew a different picture. Far from being ready to expire, orthodoxy
was ‘the only remaining vestige of Jewish passion in America’ and ‘the only group
which today contains within it a strength and will to live that may yet nourish all the
Jewish world’.

2

A few years later, Dean Kelley produced a strikingly parallel analysis of American
Christianity. Documenting the growth and decline of various denominations, he found
that those that were prospering were groups like the Southern Baptists,
Pentecostalists, Seventh-Day Adventists, Jehovah’s Witnesses and the Mormons.
It seemed as if a large-scale cultural conversion was taking shape, a turning of the
tide. Secularised Christians were being born again. Assimilated Jews were taking the
path of religious return.
A more considered analysis showed that this was not quite so. Those who crossed
denominational boundaries were highly visible but numerically few. A society-wide
revival was not in the making. The millennium was not yet in sight. But what was
happening was significant, none the less. Those whose faith was most demanding had
larger families and they gave their children a strong religious education. They had low
rates of attrition and were effectively raising a new generation who shared their
values. Against the denominational drift, they were holding their own, and
demography was in their favour. In an open society, the strongest religious
commitments were those best fitted to survive.
And this gave confidence to once demoralised traditional voices. In the backlash
against the chaos of the Sixties, their convictions rang out clearly. They knew what
they believed, and their opinions had none of the complicating subordinate clauses of
the religious liberals. They spoke with that rarest of modern accents: authority. They
had learned the lessons of modern communication and organisation. Conservative and
evangelical groups became the most enthusiastic users of radio, television and mass
mailing. In America, the Moral Majority became a significant force of political
pressure. And from these long-neglected circles came the unmistakable sounds of
triumph. By the end of the 1970s, they could claim that they had now acquired the
influence long yielded by liberals. It was a matter less of numbers than of mood. But
it was a significant turn, and raised serious questions about the picture of religion in
the modern world. Modernism, liberalism and rationalism no longer looked
invincible. Going with the secular flow had ceased to be the best strategy.
Why did it happen? We can speak only in the broadest of terms, but we can surely say
this. Our image of religion these past two centuries has been part of a larger picture.
It is reflected in the key words that came to dominate social thought in the 19th
century: civilisation, progress, evolution, even the word ‘modern’ itself as a term of
praise. These words testify to the profound future-orientation of modern culture. The
new is an improvement on the old. Optimism and anti-traditionalism go hand in hand.
It was a compelling scenario. Science would fathom the mysteries of nature, and
technology would harvest its treasures. Reason would replace superstition and
tolerance would triumph over prejudice. The modern state would bring participation
and equality. The individual would have liberty of choice, freed from paternalist
authority. So long as modernity delivered its promises, the voices of lamentation
could be ignored.
But, at some stage in the 1960s, profound doubts began to be expressed. Technology
had given us the power to destroy life on earth. Economic growth was consuming the
environment. The modern state had the power to organise tyranny and violence on a

3

scale hitherto unknown. Racial animosities had not disappeared: they had fired the
ovens of Auschwitz. ‘No Utopia had yet been brought by revolution, and the free
market was increasing inequalities between rich and poor. In the secular city, there
was homelessness and violence, and individualism had made the most basic
relationships vulnerable. Robert Bellah caught the mood when he said, ‘Progress,
modernity’s master idea, seems less compelling when it appears that it may be
progress into the abyss.’
No one was so well-prepared for these doubts as those long-ills attended conservative
religious leaders. They had developed a deep pessimism about modern culture. They
had preached against its excesses and idolatries. And now they could say: we told
you so. They spoke directly to modern discontents. Against the fragmentation of
knowledge, they could offer wholeness of vision. Against an overreaching
civilisation, they spoke a coherent language of restraint. Marx and Freud had called
religion an illusion. But now religion could reply that it had rejected the greatest
illusion of modern times: the self-perfectibility of man. Precisely those religious
movements that seemed to have been left behind by modernity became, ironically, an
avant-garde of post modernity.
But it is just here that we must confront our ambivalence. We lamented the loss of
faith. Shall we fear its rediscovery still more? One word expresses that ambivalence:
fundamentalism. It is fundamentalism, or what is sometimes described as religious
extremism or fanaticism, that makes us wonder whether religious revival might be not
a refreshing breeze but a destructive hurricane. The word was coined in America in
the 19205 in the wake of a series of pamphlets setting out the fundamentals of
Christian belief. At its simplest level it is just that—a kind of commonsense defence
of orthodoxy in a highly secular age. A reaction against what is seen as a liberal
intelligentsia’s subversion of established beliefs. What makes this a peculiarly 2OthcenturY phenomenon is that our culture has moved so far from its religious roots that
it now takes almost an act of defiance to use words like revelation, truth and authority
in their traditional sense. A fundamentalist refuses to let faith be relativised by history
or science or sociology. Revelation stands above time and speaks to us now as clearly
as it ever did. We may have changed wavelengths on our cultural radio, but we can
still hear the voice of God.
But fundamentalism is not just orthodoxy. In Protestantism, for example, it is the
belief not only that Scripture is true in every respect, but also that for the most part it
is to be understood literally. A fundamentalist tends to reject what is often called neoorthodoxy-the idea that doctrine, though true and timeless, needs always to be
interpreted in the light of our particular time. That, to the fundamentalist, sounds like
sophistry. Instead, religious texts speak to us now, directly and without interpretation,
because nothing significant has changed between the moment of revelation and
modern times.
But now a problem arises. To hold orthodox beliefs is one thing. To do so in a deeply
secular culture is another. How do you live your faith in a world that daily seems to
ignore it? Broadly speaking, there are two alternatives. One is to disengage as far as
possible from society; the other is to try to change it. Orthodox Jews tended to do the
first: to live in enclosed communities. But other conservative religious groups
favoured the second. This has meant, especially in America, campaigns to reverse

4

permissive legislation on abortion, homosexuality, pornography and other perceived
symptoms of moral decline. It is when fundamentalism moves from a defensive
doctrine into the political arena that we begin to fear a war of cultures. It is one thing
to believe in absolute truth; something else to seek to legislate it in a plural culture. At
this point, fundamentalism crashes headlong into liberal politics, and the stakes of the
confrontation are high.
But fundamentalism can go deeper still. Many religious believers experienced
modernity not as a process to be endured but as an assault to be resisted. It seems as if
their most precious beliefs were being ridiculed by an intellectual elite; as if the
foundations of the world were being removed. For Christians, it came in the form of
secularity; for Jews, assimilation; for Muslims, Westernisation. And it is here that
fundamentalism offers a theory, not of doctrine or culture but of history. Seen through
sacred texts, present conflicts can become cosmic drama, rich in images of
apocalypse: the holy war against the infidel, the global confrontation before the end of
days. And once we have reached this point, fundamentalism can-in certain
circumstances-move from spiritual vision to extremism and ultimately to violence.
It is when it meets and merges with nationalism that we risk a terrifying return to the
wars of religion. It is no accident that the most intractable conflicts of recent years
Northern Ireland, the wars and massacres of the Middle East, even the emerging
rivalries of Eastern Europe-have had a religious dimension. In an age when secular
ideologies have lost their power, revolutionary leaders have enlisted religious passion
instead. It is an explosive combination. War becomes a holy struggle against the
demonic Other. Terror is sanctified. Hatred becomes a form of piety. The present
moment is charged with metaphysical meaning, brushing lesser considerations aside.
The complexities of conflict are resolved into a simple dualism of light against
darkness. A savage catharsis will bring the promised age.
For the past two centuries, we have assumed that religion, if it survived at all, would
do so at the margins of society. This allowed us to leave unresolved the great question
of religious coexistence. As Reinhold Niebuhr pointed out, religions create
communities of love within their own boundaries, but they find relationships across
the boundaries far more problematic. The three great monotheisms in particularJudaism, Christianity and Islam-are absolute in their claims of truth, and therefore
tend to divide the world into believers and unbelievers. Historically this has meant,
within nations, a denial of rights to other confessions and, between nations, holy war.
Perhaps it was Judaism’s historical good fortune to be deprived of political power at
an early stage. Jews were used to living as a minority in exile. And this led rabbinic
tradition to articulate an important series of doctrines: that Judaism was not an
exclusive path to salvation; that cultures that respected the rule of law could not be
considered idolatrous; and that ‘the ways of peace’ must equalise the rights of all
faiths. The best tutor in religious tolerance is a situation in which you cannot survive
without it. As a result, Jews were religiously predisposed to welcome a liberal
political order. In 1783, on the threshold of Enlightenment, Moses Mendelssohn could
point out that since the destruction of the second Temple, 17 centuries earlier;
Judaism had lacked any connection between religion and state.

5

Within Christianity, too, it was the gradual separation of religion and state that
allowed, in the 17th and 18th centuries, a doctrine of universal rights to emerge. Even
so, religious prejudice could persist in secular forms. By the late 19th century,
throughout Central and Eastern Europe, Christian anti-Judaism had become racial
anti-Semitism. It took the Holocaust to make us realise that there is no nightmare like
hatred harnessed to the absolute state.
Islam’s encounter with modernity took a somewhat different course. In many
countries, it came as a religious and political onslaught: the impact of Western ideas
on a proud and ancient civilisation. It was not easy to integrate the two. At first,
cultural accommodation seemed possible; but the new values were radically
subversive of the old. The new world was less a liberation than a humiliation. So that
throwing off the recent past could encompass nationalism and religious revival at the
same time. The very reintegration of religion and state could seem like a return to
authenticity: away from the decadent secularism of the West, to the lost harmonies of
a golden age. The power of Islamic fundamentalism in the late 20th century has taken
us by surprise. But we recall that it was only a century ago that the development of
empire and the spread of Christianity were seen as going hand in hand. It takes a great
catharsis to make us recognise that other religions than our own possess integrity and
rights.
Our assumption that religion would always be marginal in modern societies led us to
believe that human rights could rest on a secular foundation. The intolerances of
religion would be resolved by the simple fact that they would lack power. That was a
fatal error in the 19th century; and is still more so today. None of us now inhabits a
space occupied only by fellow believers. We are at constant risk of being implicated
in events far from home. Innocent shoppers or passengers on a plane are blasted out of
existence by a bomb, planted in a cause on which they never took sides. The effects of
nuclear or chemical warfare are unrestricted by national borders. The remote has
become terribly near. And our understanding of international economics and the
environment completes the thought that nuclear weapons began: that no man, no
country and no religion is an island in this interconnected world.
Fundamentalism is the belief that timeless religious texts can be translated directly
into the time-bound human situation, as if nothing significant has changed. But
something has changed: our capacity for destruction and the risk that conflict will
harm the innocent. So long as tolerance and respect for human rights rest on a secular
foundation they will be overridden by those who believe they are obeying a higher
law. And the fact that the great universal monotheisms have not yet formally endorsed
a plural world is the great unexorcised darkness at the heart of our religious situation.
We may see, in the future, more national identities expressed in religious terms, as
secularism loses its persuasive power. And the great challenge of peace in the 1990s
may well be one to which only religious leaders can rise. Behind us lies a
bloodstained history of inquisitions, crusades and jihad. But beyond that lies Genesis’
momentous disclosure that every human being-the unredeemed, the infidel, the otheris still the image of God.
Toleration is not, as G K Chesterton said, ‘the virtue of people who do not believe
anything’. It is the virtue of those who believe unconditionally that rights attach to

6

the individual as God’s creation, regardless of the route he or she chooses to salvation.
That is counter-fundamentalism, the belief that God has given us many universes of
faith but only one world in which to live together. It is a truth to which we now have
no alternative.

7

