REITH LECTURES 1990: The Persistence of Faith
Presenter: Jonathan Sacks
Lecture 4: Paradoxes of Pluralism
TRANSMISSION: 5 December 1990 Radio 4

Earlier this year, Harold Pinter delivered a public lecture entitled, ‘Is Nothing
Sacred?’ It had not been written by Pinter, but by Salman Rushdie who, for security
reasons, was unable to deliver it himself. Here was one of those charged moments in
which we felt the inescapable clash of two cultures: modernity and tradition in the
shape of an iconoclastic novelist and an outraged Islam. At stake was not only the
rarefied issue of blasphemy, but even the most fundamental question of what words
mean, and what a book is. Throughout the controversy, Rushdie had argued that The
Satanic Verses was, after all, just a novel, in which words are intended neither to
cohere with reality nor to represent the views of their author. Muslims, raised in a
tradition of sacred texts, saw the written word as altogether more freighted with
significance: a sentence is an entity in its own right and an author cannot escape
responsibility merely by invoking the conventions of the modem novel. Who was
right? There was, of course, no answer. Not because the question was difficult but
because the two cultures that addressed it excluded one another.
In his lecture, Rushdie spoke directly to the theme of the novel in contemporary
society. It was, he said, a privileged arena; born, in Carlos Fuentes’ words, ‘from the
fact that we do not understand one another, because unitary, orthodox language has
broken down’. He went on to tell this parable. Imagine you are imprisoned in a large,
rambling house. It is full of strangers and friends. At some point you realise there is
no way out. Then one day you discover a room full of voices, talking about the house
and everything and everyone in it. You find solace in this room; without it, you
would go mad. That, said Rushdie, was the function of the novel. ‘Literature,’ he said,
‘is the one place in any society where, within the secrecy of our own heads, we can
hear voices talking about everything in every possible way.’
It was a provocative definition, both of literature and of sanity. Because we might
well reply that listening to voices talking about everything in every possible way is
not sanity but the quickest route to madness, and that it is precisely the condition not
just of high literature but of the whole of our fragmented culture. For sanity, the
inhabitants of Rushdie’s house might well gather together, first just a few, then in
growing numbers, to listen to someone who could tell them the story of the house, and
why they came to be there, and what lies outside, though no one has ever returned.
This religious narrative might seem to them the one thing that made living in the
house tolerable, and when, one day, their gathering was interrupted by a stranger with
a radio from which poured voices talking about everything in every possible way,
they might feel that some privileged arena had been intruded on. The two parables,
like the two cultures, exclude one another. And conflict of this kind is buried like an
explosive charge in one of the great under-examined words of our culture: pluralism.

1

What is a plural society and how did we arrive at it? It is worth remembering that not
long ago the phrase might have seemed a contradiction in terms. In 1959, Lord Devlin
argued that ‘what makes a society of any sort is community of ideas, not only political
ideas but also ideas about the way its members should behave and govern their lives.’
He added, ‘If men and women try to create a society in which there is no fundamental
agreement about good and evil, they will fail.’ He was, of course, speaking about
morals rather than culture. But there is little doubt that he had in mind a relatively
unified society, shaped not only by moral teaching but by a broad set of common
traditions, what Hegel called Sittlichkeit: the shared symbols and civilities that made
England so quintessentially English.
It was an elevated view of this culture that, for example, inspired John Reith in the
early days of the BBC. Reith believed that broadcasting has a responsibility to reflect
and strengthen what he called ‘that spirit of commonsense Christian ethics which we
believe to be a necessary component of citizenship and culture’. The voices speaking
on John Reith’s BBC might talk about everything, but not in every possible way.
They were recognisably speakers of a common language, members of a cultural
establishment. In fact, as late as 1955, when a Mrs Margaret Knight delivered a radio
talk suggesting that there could be morality without religion, one daily newspaper
complained that the BBC had allowed ‘a fanatic to go on the rampage beating up
Christianity’. And one of the governors of the BBC asked whether the broadcast
constituted seditious libel.
It was this shared culture that underlay the liberalism of the 19th century. During that
century, civil rights were extended to Catholics, members of the Free Church, and
Jews. And a clear distinction was made between the public and the private domain.
Religious confession became a matter of private conscience. And access to the
universities, professions and public office was open to all. But there remained a
distinctive language of society, and whoever wished to enter had to learn it. Irishmen,
Jews and other new arrivals had to pass through what John Murray Cuddihy called
‘the ordeal of civility’ and acquire the accents, nuances and intricate codes of polite
society. One of the rules was that religious nonconformity was permitted, so long as it
was private. And Jews learned to hide their identity so well that Sidney Morganbesser
once defined their creed as incognito, ergo sum.
The key word in this process was assimilation. As new arrivals entered still traditional
societies, they were expected to dissolve from groups into individuals and absorb the
dominant culture. By any earlier standards, this was a benign procedure. Before the
19th century, religious and ethnic minorities had been barred from at least some civil
rights. But it was not without its traumas, particularly for the transitional generation.
The Jews of Central Europe felt them acutely. Having broken away from their
parents’ faith, they found themselves still regarded as outsiders in the new society
whose manners they had so carefully cultivated. They were in that psychologically
devastating no man’s land between an excluded past and an excluding present; so that
an observer like Jacob Klatzkin, writing in the early 20th century, could speak of a
whole generation of ‘rent and broken human beings... diseased by ambivalence,
consumed by contradictions, and spent by restless inner conflict’. It was the
intellectuals of transition, double outsiders, who helped shape the modern mind:
among them Marx, Durkheim, Freud, and Kafka. Salman Rushdie is, I suppose, their
Islamic counterpart.

2

Assimilation was painful. But it seemed to be the only way a society could sustain its
coherence while admitting large numbers of newcomers. It was in America in the
early 20th century that a quite different idea began to take shape. By then, vast
numbers of immigrants had entered the United States, too many and too varied to
suppose that they would rapidly merge in the melting-pot. It was in 1915 that a young
philosopher called Horace Kallen proposed a new model of a culturally diverse
society. He made a clear distinction between the state and what today we would call
ethnicity. And he regarded it as a misconception that each new immigrant group
should undergo assimilation to the dominant culture. Instead, he envisaged that while
there would be a common language of America, each group would have for its
emotional and involuntary life, its own peculiar dialect of speech; its own individual
and inevitable aesthetic and intellectual forms. It was the first argument for cultural
pluralism. What Kallen saw was that liberalism would have to move one stage further.
It had emancipated minorities as private citizens, but it had not yet made space for
them as public cultures. The next step was inevitable. America should become
cosmopolitan.
That was pluralism in theory. In practice, though, it was not until the 1960s that a
whole series of developments in America and Western Europe shattered the idea of a
single public culture. It was then that the civil rights movement in the States
announced that black was beautiful Local identities began to be asserted, Welsh and
Scottish nationalism among them. There were large new immigrant communities in
Britain. There was talk of resurgent ethnicity. Nathan Glazer and Daniel Moynihan
stated bluntly that the point about the melting-pot was that it did not happen.
Grandchildren of immigrants developed a fascination for lost family traditions.
Marcus Hansen propounded the law that the third generation labours to remember
what the second generation strove to forget. The secular city had rediscovered what
Harold Isaacs called ‘the idols of the tribe’.
And it was not only ethnicity that began to tear at society’s seamless robe. There was
the youth rebellion against moral conformity. There were communes and countercultures and alternative lifestyles. And for once, the guardians of the older order had
no reply. The idea of a strong national culture had, after all, served as the foundation
of the century’s greatest evils, fascism and communism. The past seemed to have
used up its moral capital. The future was best left in the hands of those who would
inherit it. Theologians spoke about the death of God and the shaking of the
foundations. Liberals argued successfully that law could not be used to enforce
private morality. And with remarkable speed that set of fundamental agreements
which Lord Devlin spoke of as the basis of society had been dissolved. The lines
between private and public were redrawn. Political opinions, which were once not
discussed at dinner, were now emblazoned on T-shirts. Sexual language and imagery
which had been sheltered behind a code of reticence now became publicly sayable
and showable. It was not long before that George Bernard Shaw had shocked
audiences by his use, in Pygmalion, of the word ‘bloody’. We had become restless
with the Victorian ideal of civility-being one thing in public, another in private.
Within a decade, society had taken on the character of Rushdie’s definition of
literature, voices talking about everything, in every possible way. Pluralism was
liberalism carried through to the public domain.

3

But in the process there was a dramatic change in our social ecology. Precisely
because liberalism gained power in the 19th century, it was able to take for granted a
high degree of shared morality and belief, without having to reflect too carefully on
the institutions that sustained it. Pluralism takes much further the idea that there is no
such shared basis of society. Public policy should be neutral in matters of religion and
morality and should merely adjudicate impartially between conflicting claims. The
problem is that pluralism gives rise to deep and intractable conflicts while
undermining the principles by which they might be resolved. It disintegrates our
concept of the common good.
Sometimes we can witness this fragmentation at an early stage. Take, for example, the
recent argument over religious broadcasting. It produced an unusual convergence of
interests. Evangelicals and at least some secularists would both prefer a situation in
which religious groups were able to buy time to deliver their message, if necessary on
minority interest channels. To both sides, the move from broadcasting to
narrowcasting, from a wide to a specialised audience, represented a clear gain. To the
secularists, it would free mass audience channels from having to provide religious
programmes. To the religious, evangelising on the air would mean not having to hold
back from proclaiming the truth as one sees it. Both sides gain and no one, apparently,
loses. But there is a loser. It is the idea of a shared culture at a level beyond
entertainment and information.
Anyone who has ever delivered a religious broadcast knows how difficult it is to
speak to an unknown and open audience. To our fellow believers, we can address
words of fire; to a wider public, only the vaguest generalities. Broadcasting as
opposed to narrowcasting is low on authenticity. But if we are to have a public
culture, and one with a religious dimension, it is a discipline we have to undergo. We
have to learn to speak to those we do not hope to convert, but with whom we wish to
live. Narrowcasting frees us from that burden. But it moves us nearer a situation in
which opinion is ghettoised into segmented audiences. And where the increase of
choice means that we only have to listen to voices with which we agree.
There are more serious examples. Take the one with which I began. Liberals and
religious minorities have both objected to a situation in which only Christianity is
protected by the blasphemy laws. Instead, all major faiths should have equal
protection. But how? One side argues that the blasphemy laws should be extended to
cover them all. But that way conflict lies, because Christianity, Judaism and Islam
have all at some stage been regarded as blasphemous by one another.
Buddhists, for their part, opposed the proposal because their own rejection of
monotheism might be construed as blasphemous by Christians, Muslims and Jews
alike. Perhaps, then, blasphemy could be translated from an offence against religion to
an assault on deeply held convictions. But if so, it is difficult to see why religious
convictions should be especially privileged; and if all convictions were given equal
weight, we would rapidly move to a situation where the beliefs of any might constrain
the expressions of all. Liberals have therefore argued for an abolition of the offence of
blasphemy altogether. But this would give equal protection to each religion by giving
no protection to any.
Or consider the problem of religious education. For liberals, the answer seemed to lie
in teaching all children all faiths. The problem is that giving many religions equal

4

weight is not supportive of each but instead tends rapidly to relativise them all. It
produces a strange hybrid in which the primary value is personal choice, and we feel
free to choose bits of one tradition and place them alongside pieces of another,
disregarding the different ways of life that gave them meaning in the first place. A
multicultural mind can use Zen for inwardness, Hassidic tales for humour, liberation
theology for politics, and nature mysticism for environmental concern. But that is a
little like gluing together slices of Leonardo, Rembrandt, Van Gogh and Picasso and
declaring the result a composite of the best in Western art. The simultaneous presence
of voices talking about everything in every possible way degenerates rapidly into
mere noise.
Parents might well conclude that the only way of passing on their values to their
children was to choose a highly segregated education. And that, surely, was
pluralism’s promise: that different religious and ethnic traditions could defend
themselves against assimilation-in this case, assimilation into multiculturalism itself.
The demand for segregated, denominational schools grows rather than diminishes in a
pluralist society. But this offends against another principle of pluralism, the
harmonious mix of different groups. As a result, the Commission for Racial Equality
has recently argued for the end of all denominational schooling. A proposal to which
all religious groups will be equally opposed.
These are conflicts in which pluralism comes down firmly on both sides at once. The
reason is that at its heart are two incompatible views of a plural culture. One sees it as
a place where many traditions meet and merge. The other sees it as an environment
where distinct traditions can guard their separate integrity. At stake are two
conflicting views of freedom, one which focuses on the individual, another which
emphasises the group. Each side sees the other as a profound threat to its values.
Liberals see religions as an assault on personal autonomy. Traditionalists see liberals
as undermining religious authority. In both cases, non-negotiable values are at stake.
Pluralism becomes a moral bank account that is always overdrawn. It endorses
mutually exclusive visions of the good, and, by abandoning the concept of a common
good, leaves us inarticulate in the face of cultural collision.
From this deadlock, there is a way out. And that is to think of a plural society not as
one in which there is a Babel of conflicting language~, but rather as one in which we
each have to be bilingual. There is a first and public language of citizenship which we
have to learn if we are to live together. And there is a variety of second languages
which connect us to our local framework of relationships: to family and group and the
traditions that underlie them. If we are to achieve integration without assimilation, it
is important to give each of these languages its due.
Our local languages are cultivated in the context of families and communities, our
intermediaries between the individual and the state. They are where we learn who we
are; where we develop sentiments of belonging and obligation; where our lives
acquire substantive depth. Pluralism should not simply be neutral between values.
Rather, it must recognise the very specific value of Christians, Muslims, Buddhists,
Sikhs, Hindus and Jews growing up in their respective heritages. Traditions are part
of our moral ecology, and they should be conserved, not dissolved, by education.

5

But this is only viable if we develop an equally strong public language of common
citizenship, and it must have a richer vocabulary than the single word ‘rights’. It was
Horace Kallen himself, the first advocate of pluralism, who argued the need for values
which everyone must agree on ‘if they mean to live freely and peacefully together as
equals, none penalising the other for his otherness and all insuring each the equal
protection of the law.’
Our language of citizenship has a history. It belongs to what Felix Frankfurter
described as ‘the binding tie of cohesive sentiment’ that underlies the ‘continuity of
treasured common life’ of a nation. But like all languages, it evolves. And we must
respect both the history and the evolution. Perhaps we would no longer say as
confidently as John Reith that the ‘spirit of common sense Christian ethics’ is a
‘necessary component of citizenship and culture’. But that tradition remains a
significant part of our national life, even if it has been joined by other voices, some
religious, some secular.
We have tended to neglect that public language in recent years. We would be hard
pressed to say what shared values today made us a society. Perhaps in this age of
Europeanism and domestic diversity, we have moved beyond the whole idea of a
national identity: our attachments are either larger or smaller than that. It may be only
at times of conflict, like the Falklands War or, for that matter, the World Cup, that we
are strongly aware of national belonging at all.
If so, I believe it is a mistake. The more plural a society we become, the more we
need to reflect on what holds us together. If we have only our local language, the
language of the group, we have no resource for understanding why none of our
several aspirations can be met in full and why we must restrain ourselves to leave
space for other groups. We begin to have expectations that cannot possibly be
fulfilled. This creates sectarian leadership, the politics of protest, single issue lobbies,
and sometimes acts of violence. Pluralism can lead to a contemporary tribalism and
no one has painted a darker picture of it than Tom Wolfe in his novel, The Bonfire of
the Vanities. In its pages, contemporary New York has become a society of
conflicting ghettoes-white Anglo-Saxon Protestant, black, Irish Catholic and Jewishand to wander out of your own into someone else’s is to fall headlong into nightmare.
That, surely, we must avoid.
The task of representing shared values traditionally fell, in England, to the established
Church. Our current diversity makes many people, outside the Church and within, feel
uneasy with that institution. But disestablishment would be a significant retreat from
the notion that we share any values and beliefs at all. And that would be a path to
more, not fewer, tensions. In a society of plurality and change, there may be no
detailed moral consensus that can be engraved on tablets of stone. But there can and
must be a continuing conversation, joined by as many voices as possible, on what
makes our society a collective enterprise; a community that embraces many
communities.
Keeping this first language alive means significant restraints on all sides. For
Christians, it involves allowing other voices to share in the conversation. For people
of other faiths it means coming to terms with a national culture. For secularists, it
means acknowledging the force of commitments that must, to them, seem irrational.

6

For everyone, it means settling for less than we would seek if everyone were like us,
and searching for more than our merely sectional interests: in short, for the common
good.
We do not need to look far for a metaphor of our situation. The book of Genesis gives
us our first description of what Salman Rushdie calls the breakdown of language, the
confusion of voices talking about everything in every possible way. But the Tower of
Babel is not the end of the biblical narrative, merely its beginning. In the next chapter,
Abram is called to a faith that will not become the faith of everyone, merely the
covenant of a single extended family. Other peoples will testify to God in their own
distinctive ways. In a plural world, there are many paths to the divine presence; many
languages in which faith is expressed. What, then, is the religious imperative after
Babel? Simply this. That Abram is told: in you will all the families of earth be
blessed. That necessary tension between local and public languages, being faithful to
one tradition and yet a blessing to others, is one of the great themes of the Bible. As it
deserves to be of our time.

7

