REITH LECTURES 1990: The Persistence of Faith
Presenter: Jonathan Sacks
Lecture 3: The Family
TRANSMISSION: 28 November 1990 - Radio 4

Philosophers love posing dilemmas. Here’s one. You’re standing in the National
Gallery at the opening of an art exhibition. Suddenly a fire breaks Out and spreads
with enormous speed. In front of you is a priceless Leonardo. To your right is one of
the country’s most respected elder statesmen. To your left is your four-year-old
daughter. You can only rescue one of them. Which do you save?
Well, if you emerged into the open air with the painting or the statesman, you might
have contributed to the greater good. But I wonder whether we would altogether trust
you as a human being.
Somehow, the family goes to the heart of our sense of moral obligation. Our ties to
our children and to our parents are fundamental; and not the result of any rule or
reflection. Rather, they have to do with who we are and our peculiar relationship with
those who brought us into the world and those we have brought into being in turn. We
would be inclined to say it is an instinct, a natural feeling. But it is also a matter of
culture, of acquired values.
Back in 1976, there was an earthquake in Communist China. And the Chinese press
carried a report about a man who had rescued a local Communist official from a fallen
building. His own child was also trapped, and he had heard him crying for help. But
he chose instead to save the official, whose social value he considered to be greater.
By the time he returned to the wreckage for his son, he found him dead. The
Communist newspapers wrote about the incident as an example of proper behaviour.
What these examples suggest is that there is more than one way of ordering our
loyalties. We might inhabit a culture in which family ties mattered less to us than they
do now. But what they might also suggest is that such a culture would be an
altogether colder and less personal one. The family is not just one of our social
institutions, but, in a very real sense, the one on which all others depend. Our families
might change, but if they did, much else would change in the way we understood the
world, and not necessarily for the better.
But that, of course, is precisely what has been happening. Throughout Europe and
America in recent years, changes in the family have been significant and sudden. In
Britain, for example, the latest estimates are that 37 per cent of marriages will end in
divorce. One in four children is born outside of marriage, and cohabitation prior to or
in place of marriage has increased to the extent that it is soon likely to be the norm.
The proportion of single-parent families has risen from eight per cent in 1971, to 14
percent in 1987. In some urban areas, the figure is much higher. In inner London, for
example, it is more than one in four. Not only that. More people are staying single for
longer. There are more and more open, homosexual and lesbian relationships. So that
we have moved, within the space of two decades, from the convention of the stable

1

nuclear family—husband, wife and children in permanent relationship—to an
extraordinary diversity of sexual and social arrangements, many of which are
consciously temporary and provisional. One projection suggests that by the end of the
century only one child in two will have parents who were married when it was born
and who stay together until it has grown up.
Some people would argue that these changes are more apparent than real. People are
what they always were. It is just that what they once did secretly they now do openly.
Until the 1960s, there were established conventions of sexuality and marriage, and
some of them were given the force of law. Since then, homosexuality has been
legalised, divorce made easier, and illegitimacy has had most of its legal disabilities
removed. But there is no reason to suppose that until then what people did always
conformed to what they were supposed officially to do. Peter Laslett, for example, has
calculated that even in the 19th century—that age of high moral rhetoric—.three out
of every five first children were extramaritally conceived. As for divorce, the rising
figures are at least in part the result of legal reforms which have made available to
everyone what had been in the past the preserve of the few. Besides which, divorce is
not neces saril a weakening of the institution of marriage. It may simply be a sign that
we expect more from it The present situation, then, may just be one in which the
choices people always sought are now neither legally foreclosed nor morally
condemned. It is not so much that behaviour has changed, as that we have stopped
imposing on it the straitjacket of myth, morality and law.
But this, I think, is simply mistaken. A way of life is not only constituted by what
people do but also by the framework in which they understand what they do.
Removing the legal and moral sting from cohabitation, divorce, illegitimacy and
homosexuality does not leave the world unchanged. The gradual transformation by
which sin becomes immorality, immorality becomes deviance, deviance becomes
choice and all choice becomes legitimate isa profound redrawing of our moral
landscape, and it alters the way we see the alternatives available to us.
The change has been revolutionary. Think how far we are from the world of Jane
Austen’s heroines, where demure young ladies spent their time anxiously waiting for
the right man—in terms of class, income and character—to come along. It is harder
still for us to think ourselves into the Jewish townships of Eastern Europe only three
generations ago, made famous by Fiddler on the Roof There, in the world of my
grandparents, a couple would simply not meet without elaborate inquiries and
negotiations taldng place beforehand between the respective families, often with the
help of that archetypal Jewish figure, the matchmaker. Boy and girl met with a view
to marriage, and who could many whom was governed by an elaborate social code,
never made explicit but understood by everyone. Was Chaim the tailor a suitable
match for Mendel the grocer’s daughter? The whole town would have a view on the
matter, so it was as well to get it right. The couple might eventually meet and be left
alone, but the community was, in a sense, there in the room with them.
Since then, a whole cluster of associations has been exploded. In the 19th century,
society was still deeply divided by class, religion and ethnicity, and this set firm limits
on whom you could think of marrying. Today, those demarcations have almost gone.
Not only that. Birth control has separated sex from having children. The entry of the
state into education and welfare has, to some extent, separated having children from

2

raising them. The waning of religious teachings has removed the stigma of
cohabitation and illegitimacy, and marriage itself has lost its once sacramental
character. Living together and the ease of divorce have taken from our most basic
relationships the sense of permanence with which they were once invested. Old lines
of connection and separation have disappeared, leaving us in a world without
boundaries.
It is not surprising that novelists, playwrights and film-makers have taken boy-meetsgirl as the primal scene of the breakdown of tradition. Because it is here that the
breakdown baa been most immediate and dramatic. Even in that ordered world of
Jane Austen, for example, we can hardly fail to notice the new importance the novelist
gives to the individual, and his or her private emotions. The long journey of
modernity, from society to self has already begun. And ft was not long before English
novelists were exploring a new kind of emotion, romantic love, which for the first
time had the power to break through the iron boundaries of class. By 1980, the Jewish
writer Israel Zangwill had produced a play called The Melting Pot, in which a Jewish
boy whose parents had been killed in the Kishinev pogrom meets and marries the
daughter of the Russian colonel who had been responsible for the murder. Marriage
within the faith, which had been until now a central religious value, was dismissed as
antiquated prejudice.
As the century proceeded, even romantic love began to seem an anachronism.
Sexuality declares its independence from marriage. Better bed than wed. The very
idea of moral rules began to seem out of place in the context of personal relationships.
Where once, only a few generations ago, individuals met and in that meeting carried
with them the intemalised history of a community, today we meet as spontaneous
selves in a present which hears few marks of a shared past or a predictable future.
Rather, the values that underlie what we do have been radically transformed.
But have these been changes for the better? In some respects, surely, they have. There
can sometimes steal upon us a mood of misty nostalgia in which the sun always
shines on the past. But in the case of the British family, that involves selective vision.
It overlooks a history of often loveless but interminable marriages, and the dependent
and subordinate position of women. In Hogarth’s engravings of the 18th century, and
Dickens’s novels of the 19th, there are scenes of appalling brutalities practised on
children. Some theorists have suggested that ft was only with the decline in infant
mortality rates, at the end of the 18th century that parents could take the risk of
investing affection in their children. It was only when you were sure your child would
live that you could afford to give ft love. And it took enlightened social thought in the
19th century to end the employment of seven-year-olds in the cotton mills of
Lancashire. The move from the authoritarian to the democratic family, in which each
of the members has a say; the idea of love as the basis on which two people come
together and get married; even the importance of the family itself as a ‘haven ina
heartiess world’ are all relatively recent, and enrich our sense of relationship. So is
hard to place all the changes in the modem family on the side of loss.
But there have been some voices to suggest that we have not gone far enough. One
influential line of modern thought has argued that the family is in need not of change
but abolition. Karl Marx suggested that the bourgeois family lay at the heart of the
capitalist economy. Radical post-Freudians argued that it was a source of

3

psychological distress, schizophrenia especially. Feminists like Shulamith Fireatone
have seen ft as the perpetuation of patriarchy. And Sir Edmund Leach, in a famous
sentence in his Reith Lectures, summed it up when he said that ‘Far from being the
basis of the good society, the family, with its narrow privacy and tawdry secrets, is the
source of all discontents.’
Now whether or not we agree with these ideological critics, they take us to the heart
of the proposition with which I began, namely that the family is not just one of our
institutions, but a formative one, the crucible in which much else of our social
structure takes shape. We learned from Malinowski’s studies of Melaneaia and
Margaret Mead’s of Samoa that there are very different ways of organising sexuality,
kinship and socialisation. But we also know that these would result in different
attitudes to politics, property, and the relationship between the individual and society.
The French anthropologist Emmanuel Todd has recently traced an impressive set of
connections between different family systems and the worldwide distribution of
political ideologies. The absolute nuclear family, for example, is closely related to
liberal democracies, the authority in the home to authority in the state. The family is
the birthplace of our social world. So we might arrange our families differently. But it
will be a different kind of world that we will be creating.
It was Margaret Mead who pointed out that the deep sentiments we call human nature
are formed by the primary groups in which we are raised. ‘If these are essentially
changed,’ she said, ‘human nature will change with them.’ It is a discovery that the
pioneers of the kibbutz made early on. Having abolished marriage and the family and
handed children over to collective child-minders, they found that they had raised a
generation quite unlike themselves: less emotional, striving and individualistic; more
matter-of-fact and inclined to think of identity in terms not of the self but of the
group. As our families fragment, so do the deepest structures of our consciousness.
When a certain kind of family breaks down, so do the values which once linked
parents and children and gave continuity and character to our inherited world.
Which is precisely why ideological radicals have focused on the family. Change ft
and you change humanity. But let us turn the argument round. If changing the family
would change the world, protecting the family might be the best way of protecting our
world. Which is, I believe, what religious tradition has been doing until now.
Because the Hebrew Bible is above all shook about the family. It begins with one:
Adam and Eve and the command to bring the next generation into being. And from
then on the hook of Genesis never relaxed its grip on the subject. It endlessly turns to
some new variation in the relationship between husbands and wives, parents and
children. Abraham and Sarah; Isaac and Rebekkah; Jacob, Rachel and Leah: these are
not miracle workers or agents of salvation. The heroes and heroines of Genesis are
simply people living out their lives in the presence of God and the context of their
families.
And we can perhaps now see that this forms the foundation of the Bible’s larger moral
and social themes. The family is the matrix of individuality. It is that enclosed apace
in which we work out, in relation to stable sources of affection, a highly
differentiated sense of who we are. It is hard to imagine s culture which did not

4

possess a close family structure arriving at the breathtaking idea that the human
individual is cast in the image of God.
De Tocqueville once wrote that ‘as long as family feeling is kept alive, the opponent
of oppression is never alone’. By which he meant that the family is the great
protection of the individual against the state. It is no coincidence that totalitarian
regimes have often attacked the family. Against this, it was the Bible that gave rise to
the great prophets who dared to criticise kings. The family is the birthplace of liberty.
Not only that it is where we care for dependants, the very young and the very old,
those to whom we gave birth or who gave birth to us. And it is a short step from this
to the biblical vision of society as an extended family, in which the poor and
powerless make a claim on us, by virtue not of abstract principle but of feelings of
kinship. it is this that lies behind the prophetic identification with the widow, the
orphan and the stranger. They are not merely people with theoretical rights. They are
part of the family.
Marriage, for the Bible, is a covenant and one closely related to that which joins
humanity to God and the members of society to one another. A covenant is not merely
a contract. It is a religious, not just a legal agreement It is one in which the partners
bind themselves to mutual fidelity and concern. So that the biblical idea of society,
which flows from its view of marriage, is different from the secular idea of a social
contract. it is not just an association for mutual advantage. it is a covenant of loyalty
and trust.
And the family is where we discover our past. The Bible instructs us to teach our
children diligently, speaking of God’s law when we are at home or on our way, when
we lie down or when we rise up. Repeatedly it tells parents to tell children the story of
their origins, the exodus and the long journey to freedom. The family is where
traditions are handed on, where I learn that the past lives on in me, and through me in
my children. It is the basis of collective memory. And on it rests the biblical view of
history as the stage on which the covenant between man and God is enacted and
within which we construct a just society. The family is ‘a narrative institution’, the
place where we tell the story of where we came from. And its breakdown leads to
what J H Plumb called ‘the death of the past’, the loss in our society of a historical
sense.
So the family as a religious institution is what holds much of our moral world in
place. It lies behind our ideas of individual dignity and freedom, of social kinship and
concern, and our sense of continuity between the future and the past Lose it and we
will lose much else as well.
Why then do we seem to have been doing just that? Because of the most powerful
legacy of the Enlightenment—our idea of the abstract individual, detached from the
collective bonds of history and sentiment. The self of modern moral theory has no
limits on what it can choose to do or be other than those externally set by law. No one
way of life has any intrinsic precedence over any other so long as it is freely chosen.
Such a theory tends, in the long run, to dissolve morality altogether. But certainly it
deconstructs the family. It undermines its ethical foundations. Because at every stage
the concept of the family stands counter to the idea of unrestricted choice. To be a

5

child is to accept the authority of parents one did not choose. To be a husband or wife
is to accept the exclusion of other sexual relationships. To be a parent is to accept
responsibility for a future that I may not live to see. Families only exist on the basis of
choices renounced. And our secular culture has made that voluntary closure of options
hard to accept or even understand.
The family has persisted as an institution; but increasingly we have lacked the
resources to say why it should. Our intellectual world has not given it space. To the
contrary, our current lack of any norms relating to sexuality and marriage precisely
reflects the supreme importance we have given to the abstract individual, without
binding commitment either to the past or to the long-term future, open-endedly free to
choose or unchoose any style of life. The family has lost its moral base.
Admittedly, this has not happened because of Enlightenment philosophy alone. It has
happened because of social changes of which that thought was an early anticipation.
Education and welfare, which once took place within the family, have been largely
transferred to the state. Television means that information is no longer filtered to the
child primarily through its parents. The pace of change means that we can no longer
assume a common world with our children. And in a technological society, age loses
the authority of wisdom. It is our children who understand computers, not us. The
mass entry of women into the workforce has dramatically changed our child-rearing
practices. And these changes, along with the breakdown of our moral traditions, have
weakened the force of family bonds. We cannot unwrite them. But we cannot suppose
that they do not have momentous implications for those who will inherit the world we
have made.
The irony of the 1980s is that the decade which witnessed the worldwide retreat of the
state before the individual also witnessed the accelerated disintegration of the family,
the primary protection of the individual against the state. Our private lives will be
significantly eroded if one child in two will no longer reach maturity in stable
association with the people who brought it into being. What then will stand between
us and the impersonal operations of the free market and the state? From whom, other
than our parents, wifi we learn who we uniquely are? The 20th century, through Freud
and others, has taught us the enduring influence of our early experience of childhood.
But the 20th century has rendered the family uniquely problematic. And the world
that witnesses its loss will be a colder and less human place.
But it is here that we come up against a surprising fact that has run like a connecting
thread through these lectures. Despite the many factors making for its erosion, the
family persists. It still lies at the heart of our sensibilities. Few things so distress us as
television pictures of children separated from their parents, or move us like scenes of
families being reunited. Overwhelmingly, we do still marry and hope that our
marriages will last. In a recent survey almost nine out of ten of those interviewed said
that they valued faithfulness as the most important ingredient in marriage. We still
believe in the family, without quite knowing why.
The family is a religious institution that survives in a secular culture. Our attachment
to it makes no sense in terms of the theories or social changes that have surrounded us
since the Enlightenment. But it makes a great deal of sense in terms of the argument I
have been advancing, that we are still more religious than we suppose. Faith is not

6

measured by acts of worship alone, it exists In the relationships we create and it lies
deep in our moral commitments.
The Jewish tradition saw the family as the greatest religious domain of all. The first
commandment in the Bible is to have children, and there is no act we can perform that
testifies more lucidly to faith in the future of our world. The survival of the Jewish
people throughout almost 4,000 years of exile and dispersion is due, above all, to the
strength of its families. And it was when parents and children sat together round the
table that they could most immediately feel the touch of the divine presence.
The family is a much assaulted, much wounded institution, but it endures: testimony
to a sense of covenantal love that can still break through the secular surface of our
lives and surprise us by its unexpected and religious strength.

7

