this is a cold currents from the odd coates of the b. b. c. to greece collect chairs this deck chair that he snubbed the language of the genes given by steve jones was originally approved cost in nineteen ninety one is to visit sigmund freud's house in hampstead you see on his desk some unexpected objects a stone ax at a junction scatter in some ancient figure leaps being easy suggested were graphics of the trial court that the human race messages from our ancestors whose experiences in the doughnut humanity still shape our lives the gills of ghosts in the dim past who killed their father after raping the women of their tribe mingus sold today and according to freud many of our anxieties and on your scenes in memory of ancient times which could only be uncovered in the habit is catch our genes to calm messages from the past and much more reliable than those received by freud pony in the past twenty years have we become to read the language of the genes to decipher our own instruction manual and on the stone the clues about ourselves knesset by arens instance in the structures are alaska what genetics cat and more important what it can alter tell us about the historic depressant on the future if human colony the idea that the human condition can be explained by events that took place logo is central to psychoanalysis to richard and for that matter too much with politics recently some psychologists of politicians but not many geneticists have tango when controlled by messages from our assistance to promote condom biological facial is humanity is driven by its genes and a biology as a source of the regional said the pool of victims of a jeans better to come and is due to debt over weakness it is nothing to do with the rest of us are such new bell cow additions suggests that as human life was programmed logo has no point in trying to change it which is convenient for those who like things the way they are friday and is politicians and historians see almost no limit to what death pact theories can explain it to silence the contrast is strictly limited and deborah estonia that erosion perhaps most of all u. c. s. s. of any scientific theory that it cannot explain everything every scientist spends his time trying to disprove his own past theories to say his intellectual children in a contrast with dosing goldin puppet created in deference signs contents of all our questions particularly the sorts of things that have not restored children ask why he always had lost the point of being a life how all tree to the haze that has nothing to say about such things and almost nothing to say about what makes us more than just machines did by biology about what makes us human in retrospect much inhuman genetics before the war was scarcely science the toll he was quiet ,comma willing to accept its own limits soon after it began human genetics found itself somewhat to its surprise and almost uniquely among the signs since being astrid thoughts about cord that evoked the quality of people have that kind of society we should live in some geneticists felt that they were quite fight to comment on such issues sometimes they would even take it seriously with disastrous results this history has made those in the field today very cautious about claims that the essence of purity designs in our cheeks mulgrew genetics is with a few assigns his richest reduced its expectations it certainly showed white sociology is best left to sociologists are in politics to politicians to put the new genetics together with it all to ferry the theory of evolution has also given us a unique and stopping insight about where we came from how we filled the welds unwashed sex age and death really me tolley like freud sold the past as the key to the present he proved that the pattern of life in motor creatures shows' content related to each other of that s. s. israelite canal leichter grass from its beginnings to the present day the most famous drying in the origin of species it is that lights may be shed all manner of his origins doll when tenants that humans share a common dissent with every other creature is now accepted by all biologists even if it is not fun to be off the american public is tainted by current history has been more accustomed by modern biology and understanding about how a place in nature has been transformed by the new ability to feed the inherited messages from the past before genetics indeed even twenty years ago we knew almost nothing about our own beginnings written history doesn't start until two hundred or so human generations ago myths go back a little further and offer seemed to be trying to tell us something about our origins by heroes to send it into the underworld and safe prieto and using the bible the odyssey and the tactic of gil demisch current about fine thousand years ago killed diminish had got the lead in the flood is not up to the generations to study the bible to estimate the days of nellis flood you get a date or two thousand three hundred in forty nine b. c. knew geological evidence shows that there was a flood in the middle east about bad admits preserved some hints of the truth fossils to writings about the past but often not much more than that he did the best fossil beds fragments of roney about one in the video in ten million copies of most surprising made are still furious arguments among paoli intelligence about where humans festa rose and how they filled the world that a problem because debris can never be show up at any fossil has asked a descendant of life today in contrast we know it can't be one of our genes must have a less sinister we could use them to piece together a picture of human history more complete than from any other sorts each sheet is a message from our past and together they contain the whole story of human evolution jeans give us a better insight about who we opt in anything else each one of us is a dating fossils cutting wood in our genes history which goes back to the beginnings of humanity and fabio the historical documents one of many kinds of somebody's easy to reach a few families make a point of presenting are so strong messages as rios the profound raske said in court about the genetics why we come to stand for mika said other bombings in fears he asked has traced two hundred sixty two thousand one hundred forty two alleged ancestors of cuts charles yet stock is seen with the forest geneticists interested in shared dissent they also kept details pedigree is the family temple -hyphen nugent -hyphen bridges -hyphen chan dos -hyphen grown film has a marathon eighth multi battled names but it has seven hundred nineteen symbols on its coach of alms each showing a genetic link to another line of inheritance names and alms wholesome trot down the generations in cars sold with genes the hapsburg narrate pundits christo pork they threw seven hundred years of european royalty dos inheriting these were liable to get something else to change corporate trudy billowing chill the hapsburg at the famous lip and kenichi scene in the holy roman empire in fourteen fifty almost a prominent in the spanish royal family in a century ago this particular gene doesn't do much more that come from all we know about dance history for the record of one family every family aristocratic arnotts inherits the genetic record sometimes perez in the message genetic abnormalities are beyond inclusive shared dissent fullest juvenile blindness headed to the globe ,comma is found in france painstaking such as a parish records show that malta hofstra cases are descended from this single couple who lived in getting to tell a consisting century eaten today pilgrims pray in the village church which contains a system whose waters are believed to cure blindness fifty thousand descendants of this couple have been traced to and from many the diagnosis of the disease was the first clue about where their s. s. is paying for today's britons traced ancestry from many parts of the world for populations with black skin or whites around i saw a matter of these cactus has said the summit of us to where the families came from but a very incomplete toward fewer than ten genes are responsible for the difference between the blackest of the white is human skin up what we need homeboys heretic messages fortunately modern genetics gives us just left to cement a new sri past to take us back to the beginning of humanity a hundred thousand years ago and to the origin of life three thousand billion years before backed these clues can be a threat as a language jeans and language is the volta in much the same way i genetics is a language a set of instructions passed from generation to generation that has a vocabulary the genes themselves but grandma the way in which he headed to the information is arranged and how the trichet professors of instructions needed to make a human being but which is based on the d. n. a. molecule the famous double helix the high cost of the twentieth century it has a simple alphabet of twenty six seconds to just four to four different d. n. a. base since eight g. c. and t. chris short these are ancient word stuffing leftists eschews c. ga corti gigi boasts of the west coast are different amino acids the building blocks of the board just so economical this language is like an illustrator for the drama owns quotation from "double-quote dance of the written in nineteen thirty nine by one artist rocked i'm going to show you how a bunch of bright young folks did find a champion of ryan with boys and tells of his own amana so dominate to unhappy individuality that joost was drawn to it as if lying to a sugar bowl is so solid care if it does with rest of the fifty thousand would book a bit tense the quotation and hoboken does not contain the lead to the weekend managed to right to meaningful sentence with twenty five letters to set a twenty six but don't ingest spliced manages with just full of old and had a message is simple its very low heat salim up body contains about six feet to d. n. a. to use this but amusing fact is that if all the d. n. a. in all lists cells in a single body was stretched out would lead to the modem back eight thousand times does not plan to treat the whole of its three thousand million elections and to publish what may be the most boring book ever written the equivalent of a rapid dozen copies of the collected works of sigmund freud which itself phil's twenty full sullied volumes as much disagreement about how to set about to reading the message and even about whether it's worth during the toll it probably is the capital to send the beetle to south america with charles darwin onboard notes because they would increase the evolution that because they knew that the fed stepped in to standing on whitlock and trolling the world was to make a map of its saint may be true for the genetic map of ourselves to make it would be expensive in fact about the cost of a single trident submarine attacks could also be a sturdy finally tedious one for those who actually have to do the work it's been suggested natale ingest the molecular biologists found guilty of taking their results should be sentenced to sequence a thousand ten thousand ,comma one hundred thousand d. n. a. elections depending on the gravity of a karate bubbly fest discoveries of the geneticists who sets out to make a map of ourselves was nowhere to all different bomb more different than anyone had previously told that enough thousands of inherited plumes acidic nomo variation most diseases which can be used to look at patterns of shared ancestry because cuomo for genes that copies of genes from r. s. s. as the differences between people can all be used as messages from the past and is a people who look different one from the other a while because c. is just the tip of the iceberg of human uniqueness even trivial test shows some hidden in headed to differences stink hilltop left kenya village into a two about tossed abridged population can cost cutoffs are still has the other which thomas don't talk again about hoffa population told the left arm above the right to have about hoffa doesn't get away these characteristics that we are in families but the details of their inheritance like inheritance of the way we broke in a bid to the mass summoned in the city or differences in december that genetic control in the nineteen thirties embodied by jarrett high strays was surprised to receive complaints of his customers who trained the dead are ice tasted bitter this baffled the unfortunate entrepreneur left as the rice tasted just like i stand attend added that are genetic differences in the ability to taste the chemicals that t. c. used in the manufacturing pro sets to some that traces this chemical waste in toyota made it to or to others concentration a thousand times greater has no taste at toll the difference depends on just one gene which exists in two forms taste in unknown tasted but i was a student to which a guarded this superbly witty to make tea containing the d. c. had to observe but not so much to those who could drink it a dose to court to now unfortunately students have more sex is all variations of this drama set the example when blood from two people is mixed it may turn into a sticky mess which would be fatal in a blood transfusion to process is controlled by a system with heretic clues are excels dublin groups only settle combinations can be mixed successfully depend to a different part of systems some phonetic alike radio when racist province knesset quick defeat and cattle millions of people have been tested a dozen systems are routinely screened each with a number of different forms a large amount of diversity is generated by just a small sample about genes and chassis is set to randomly chosen englishman having missed a combination of old twelve one group's historian bats one in three thousand blunder to discover that what we now regards as the stone age ,comma make it a biology since and this being a technical revolution like the loony ethic revolution which gave rise to modern humans this depends on some simple tools which can be used in many different ways we can now deciphered the factual quarter of that is in the genetic message or happens only compared the d. n. a. of unrelated people in this way intelsat that just doesn't go in groups that do are accepted twins is district on the average two people differ in about one candidate or a thousand this kid's about three million cases in the inherited message which differ from person to person up russell unique receipts topped tells us something useful about ourselves particular biology has made it into the deals also nobody warehouse that oracle will lift has built up precisely the same genetic plant as anyone else this information helps us to understand where we checked in the family of humankind and the bidding will act as a whole relatives come more likely to share genes that automated people because of course they have an ancestor acting ,comma this means the week in hughes' genes to test family croatian ships them or genes to the porsche double alike that they ought to be presented exactly the same logic can be used to sort out more distant pattinson relate to miss the herd has to say the shared ancestry of humans and other creatures this is very easy when close to other teams are involved before d. n. a. tests were available integration offices often refuse to believe that a particular child was the last thing of the woman who claimed it attests nearly always showed that the mother was telling the truth chand jeans allow us to such a tough one distant ovitz's to two in a military dictatorship in argentina more than ten thousand people dissipated most overloaded summer days of pregnant women who were killed after they had given birth benny the children belonged was stolen by military families after nineteen eighty three a group of mothers of the murdered women began to search for the grandchildren of american scientists set out to compare the d. n. a. had these children with those who came to be the grandparents the message asked machines from grandparent to grandchild allowed more than fifty of the children to be restored to the biological families from those who stole our posts so combination of genes coms amass testers who died long before our grandparents get in some ways the genetic code to the bombs and like the shield of the temple -hyphen mutant -hyphen bridges -hyphen channels -hyphen grand bills it contains a record of who our zest as well and who they were related to when a cold roof to take the jeans with a so that by making maps of genes in modern human kind we can do more than just traced sent we can use genetics to me create history sometimes history itself is a clue as to where to start a lake's haley his book groups accused documents on the slave trade to try to find his african ancestors he found tony walked cortex in to buy name could be taken as a slave from the gambia hit seventeen of sixty seven that patterns of genetic diversity of today's black americans could have told the watch will about fifteen million africans were shipped to the americans they came from all over west africa ,comma it dispersed over much of the new world slade illness had distinct references in south carolina strays from the gambia was favored over those of the effort as the latter with old to be hard to control in virginia that france was in the opposite direction we can now use genes to sort out just who went west in when they came from many africans have abnormal full of the red pigment of the gaullist hemoglobin this sickle cell fold protects against bavaria to gene involved is associated with different d. n. a. variants in various parts of africa because of its medical importance this d. n. a. has been much studied b. could use the details of d. n. a. structure to track down just where in africa dss dessert a us black artists of the rejected black americans in both to vault in the gulf have a different set of variance from those in the southern states because of the difference in the slave markets two hundred years ago in extending by comparing his genes with those of different african countries by two blunt much more about his ancestors to the court for the written records hygiene sub already taken us back a hundred india's but they bring messages for far longer ago some of these kids surprisingly subtle hints about the patterns of life in ancient human society they suggest for example that men and women have a different history which may stretch back a short time before the origin of a better coach some genes inherited mainly through females or less cells contain much confidence small energy factories days have their own tiny pieces of d. n. a. distinctive notions o'neal to square the great bridge arty of genetic information is stored spoke on tributaries you want a quarter in a ford taurus at u. s. o. like jewishness this d. n. a. is passed through the female line it contains the history of the world's women with almost no old mail into parents for example quinnell is abut the second's mitre called a d. n. a. d. sends much of queen victoria harass esta through the male line but from the less evident handicapper line who died in eighteen eighty one the patterns of changing what it called a jeans differ from those which passed down through both males and females to when they beat davies by coincidence romo like the evolution of first names boeing's names don't change much from place to place in the english speaking world those names are more vocal lines can be both more quickly only one of the top ten girls' names sarah is the same in the united states and in england in contrast fall a further ten favorites among bodies at the same on both sides of the atlantic michael christopher matthew daniel and dated the distribution of much conley of genes is similar to that of girls names much continuity and a fifty m. l. carr and his variable and each type is quite localized in african pygmies shed much of condos types are rarely found small but about twenty kilometers of popped the genes carried by both sexes cover a much wider range in the pygmies communities five hundred kilometers apart in a very different ink genes which pass through mails as willis females this may be a message from the distant past about the drawl of men and women in society men have ranged widely perhaps to hunting backs because of wolf that what we intended to state pascoe the fossils show that i assessed as it did in africa about a hundred thousand years ago we have other african villages to one of them the chimpanzee has always seemed to take care of the coast to ourselves so much so indeed had one chinook cocoa had inhabitant of the golan be stream reason a was the first animal to have an obituary in the times chants chana many of our cheeks a distinguished and famously humorless geneticist at the nineteen forties once tested with a shadow of variation in tasting that it's a chemical p. t. c. he set this up to three chimps at london's and tube swallowed its with every sign of disliked but the third spot in the great wall over the famous professor discord scientific though it is a study suggests some genetic sherry got common ancestry court chimps and ourselves we now know that this goes much further one estimate is that we share ninety eight percent of our genetic material with champs we can trace is a sickness to progress to the animal kingdom as well it's been known for many years that mice and men have a lot in common schools of human genetic diseases but also found in mice we shed even more genes with the products whether we should be proud of this old marks when not sure to maine this new accord jean sharing is some ways puts paid to the whole idea that genetics can tell us anything about the human condition about the nature of humanity that champ may shed ninety eight percent of its genes with ross buddies seventy not ninety percent human exhausts human toll is jim and does the fact that we share some of our genes with imasco saw potato customizing useful about ourselves quest seen claims of the human d. n. a. sequence would give us a new philosophical insight but we will find the gene that makes us human this idea seems to me ridiculous just help ridiculous it is weak is seen by looking at is set for another important gene the gene that makes me mail this was tracked down a few months ago and its message spells out in the form d. n. a. based its it starts like this g. eight to eight h. e. a cheek to cheek eighty eight g. c. h. e. a throwback to an interim force in the sectors of the whole messy joel espana you from having to listen to the whole tedious story of being amassed this gene is all you need to attain the elevated status of masculinity that is inserted into developing female minds that it turns into a male maps however assuring the doolittle message i just read does nothing to tell that talk of the population which is important to know if balked at it for what it's really like to be a matter or that a woman masculinity mean some overall this sequence of d. n. a. bases this same is true for humanity with the problems of modern genetics is that it's usually fails to get up to its headline splice favorite incident he was one that american newspaper the national enquirer and which greeted the fest adia fossil d. n. a. asks us scientists clone dinosaurs to fight song about a new chair will headline writers have to break a complicated story about human life came to a message made up of the few that is it's an actual mistake to think of the genetic message summarize intimations about ourselves in the same way the s. concha overstating the successes of the scientific method usually does his reduction next to run to start something when asked to break it down into its component parts get throats city works well thus far to coast but it only goes so far when it does not trois caught because he had a phrase notorious in british politics mrs. thatcher's statement but that is no society that are already indicate he warms to stand as the best or most of the old around us to say that i know people don't only genes is to fold into the same trap human genetics has been transformed in the past fifty years geneticists to have had a change in attitude to stay in more years ago some geneticists were filled with extraordinary self assurance they were happy to make sweeping statements about the importance of genes in helping humanity toward distended self in a bout that haven't seen shaking society or even politics as is often the case in science knowledge is accompanied by humility in all we know the more it seems that is to know geneticists nowadays have no interest in what the subject might say about the margin to eight issues which occupied it paid assassins instead because in the cells with purely scientific questions with helping those who suffer from genetic disease genetics has maturity as a science exceeds its own limitations genetics said the task like anatomy sociology or psychoanalysis give us a good and so some of the elements which together make up humanity freud's own work tells us something about ourselves which genetics does not he was drawn into sinking that events in the childhood of the human race could assist in our subconscious to danny box one thing is that in one sentence you to go in the water freud was right to we too have within ourselves a record of odious beginnings hygiene misshapen memory and at last we have a way of persuading them to recall the past you beat a screened to the court ,comma from the odd coates of the b. b. c. greased lek chairs to more put car keys visited bt seed dole to collude to acute case starts greets you four 