REITH LECTURES 1991: The Language of the Genes
Steve Jones
Lecture 3: In God’s Image
TRANSMISSION: 27 November 1991 – BBC Radio 4

American bird watchers know that the common sparrow, the same bird that hops
around in our own gardens, has a bigger body and shorter legs in the north than in the
south of the United States. The same is true for sparrows in northern and southern
Europe. Creationists - and there are more than a hundred million of them in America see in this the Deity arranging things so that each species fits into the economy of
nature; cold places, wherever they are, meriting a subtle change in God’s plan.
If there is a plan, it seems to work in the same way for humans. People from the far
north have shorter arms and legs and more compact bodies than those from the
tropics. That is why Olympic running records tumbled after Kenyans, with their long
legs, began to take part. To philosophers before Darwin, the ability of Africans to
cope with heat and Eskimos with cold was excellent evidence for divine action. The
Creator had seen to it that each people suited their homeland; showing just what a
wonderful designer He was.
Humans were perfect, created in God’s image. As the 19th century cleric William
Paley argued, if one found a watch, beautifully designed, then one must accept the
existence of a watchmaker. The perfection of humanity proved in the same way that
there was a God. This idea seemed such a powerful one that it was sometimes carried
to absurd lengths. Voltaire, in Candide, parodied it with Dr Pangloss and his delight at
seeing the perfection with which noses had been designed to carry spectacles. Freud a keen Darwinist - commented that one might just as well argue that the fact that cats
have two holes in their skin precisely where their eyes are could be explained in the
same way.
Now we know that there is a big problem with the argument from design, as it is
called, for the sparrows at least. In fact, English sparrows have not been in the
Americas since the time of Creation. They got there little more than 100 years ago. A
few were brought from England and released in Brooklyn in the 1850s. They spread
to fill the continent, taking about a century - 100 sparrow generations - to do so. How
did they come to resemble so closely the sparrows of their native home?
The answer lies in natural selection: inherited differences in survival and
reproduction. Studies of marked sparrows in Kansas show that large individuals with
short legs survive better in freezing weather. They hence have a chance to breed, to
pass on their genes, when spring comes. The birds released a century ago had genes
for large or small size and stocky or graceful legs. In the north, the big squat birds did
better, but in those that spread to the torrid south the opposite was true. In a few
generations, American sparrows evolved just the same geographic patterns as those in
Europe. Selection had done its work.

1

Exactly the same process affected humans. During much of our spread across the
world, the climate was even worse than it is today. Twenty thousand years ago, the
early Frenchmen who painted the cave at Lascaux could not relax by basking in the
sunshine in a pavement cafe. The arctic ice was only 300 miles away, and they had to
stay warm to stay alive. The short, fat peoples of the North - just like the sparrows are better at conserving heat. Those with more graceful figures from hotter climes
cool down more effectively as they lose heat through their long arms and legs.
Fossils show that this change in shape happened within 1,000 human generations of
our migrating from our African home; longer than it took the sparrows, but not much.
Selection acted in the same way in birds and in humans. Those with genes for a body
build which resists cold prospered in the North; others in the South. Interestingly
enough, the Neanderthals, our extinct cousins, who had lived in a chilly Europe long
before the modern upstarts arrived, were even shorter, squatter and heavier; well
adapted to a cold climate. Most people would change seats if Cro-magnon, an early
European, sat next to them on the tube; but would change trains if a Neanderthal did
the same thing.
In this lecture I will talk about the way in which natural selection works, and about
whether civilisation means that its work is at an end.
Wherever we look, we find selection. The living world is full of it because the living
world has been produced by it. As Darwin pointed out, it will happen whenever
animals produce more offspring than the environment can support and when these
differ among themselves in the chance of surviving. Oscar Wilde put it more
succinctly, as: “Nothing succeeds like excess”. Humans are no exception to this rule.
For most of our history nearly all those born died young - of cold, hunger or disease.
Selection has had plenty of chances to mould the human condition.
The theory of evolution by natural selection was a sensational one in 1859, the year
the Origin of Species was published, because it seemed to remove the need for a
direct link between God and man. There is a story of one Victorian lady saying to
another about Darwin’s work: “My dear, let us hope that it is not true; but, if it is, that
it does not become generally known.” After the Church establishment had recovered
from the shock, several religious thinkers came up with the idea that evolution was in
fact a way of working out God’s plan. Even if humans were not perfect, they were
perfectible, and natural selection was the means which the Deity had chosen of doing
it. However, as we will see, its action, far from perfecting the imperfect, often seems
incompetent or even cruel. There is not much comfort for Panglossians here.
Selection chooses the best available at a particular time, even if it is only a little better
than what went before. Lewis Carroll once illustrated the way it works. Imagine that
we have a three letter word - “pig”, for example - and we want to change it into
another - “sty”. We can change any letter into any other. If we make random changes
and just hope for the best, taking any meaningless set of letters each time, it takes
thousands of moves to get the pig into the sty. Natural selection imposes a rule: all the
words in between must make sense. It picks up the combinations which look good and
builds on them. It gets there in just six steps: pig, wig, wag, way, say, sty.
Selection gets rid of the need for a designer; a Kenyan’s long legs are due to evolution
rather than to God. It can do some astonishing things, but there are some things it
2

cannot do. It cannot plan ahead; it acts without foresight, taking no thought for the
morrow. Selection does just what is needed, and no more, and sometimes it does it in
what seems like a slapdash and shortsighted way. There is some danger of seeing the
whole of biology as evidence for natural selection. Just as the theologian Paley saw
the complexity of life as an argument for God, there is a kind of neo-Paleyism which
has plagued evolutionary theory, which argues that all animal structure and behaviour
must be well adapted, so that it must always reflect the action of selection. This
argument may be a circular one, but it is difficult to disprove. However, selection is
just a mechanism, and not a force for good.
We can see how it acts as a rather mindless mechanic when cancer is treated. Cancer
patients are often given a drug which attacks dividing cells. The treatment sometimes
fails. Natural selection is at work. A few cells have undergone mutations which allow
them to break down the drug. These reproduce more rapidly than the others and soon
take over; sometimes so effectively that the patient dies. There is not much evidence
of a benign designer here.
I will talk about how just one kind of selection has shaped the peoples of the world. It
is the best known of all - the evolution of resistance to disease. In the 18th century,
half the Englishmen who went to West Africa died within a year, and only one in ten
came home safely. When Europeans and their African slaves first went to South
America, it was the natives who suffered. The population of Mexico dropped from 25
million to one million between 1500 and 1600. The great killer was disease: malaria,
smallpox, and typhus. In both New and Old Worlds those who had lived with a
disease for many generations survived better; there seem to be inborn differences in
resistance between people from different places. Where do they come from?
Throughout history, the greatest killer and the greatest agent of selection has been
disease. In the 14th century - only 30 human generations ago - the population of
England was halved by the black death. Today, there are predictions that Aids in some
African countries means that their populations will soon begin to drop. Death from
cold or starvation may be brutal, but at least the enemy is predictable. Disease
organisms are themselves alive. They have an ecology; they need a constant supply of
new victims; they can evolve. There is a race between natural selection on our
survival and that on the disease’s ability to infect us.
Patterns of disease depend on the number of people available. The longer a disease
has a hold on somebody, and the more efficiently it is transmitted, the smaller the
population needed to allow it to persist. Immunity also plays a part. Measles, for
example, does not last long and is not particularly infectious. It needs a community of
at least half a million people to keep going. We have lived in groups as large as this
for only about 2,000 years, so that measles must be a fairly new disease. This constant
change in the pattern of disease means that evolution can never rest: far from
perfecting us, it is constantly faced with new problems.
Ten thousand years ago humans lived in small bands. Infectious disease may scarcely
have existed. No doubt there were plenty of lice and tapeworms, but the ancient world
was a healthy one. People starved, froze or were eaten by tigers instead. With
farming, the population shot up and a whole new set of diseases appeared. Things got
even worse in the first villages and towns. There has been movement from the
3

countryside into cities and towns for more than 1,000 years, but epidemics meant that
no city was self-sustaining until the 18th century. London at the time of Pepys was a
town of 100,000 people; but it needed 5,000 immigrants per year to maintain its
population in the face of pestilence.
Faced with this onslaught, natural selection can never afford to relax. We will see it at
work in its struggle against malaria, still one of the greatest killers of children in the
world. Malaria is caused by a single-celled parasite which is transmitted to humans by
mosquitoes. The parasite multiplies within both man and mosquito, and is highly
infectious. The disease needs a fairly dense population to keep going. It probably
began to attack humans 10,000 years ago, when Africans shifted from hunting on the
savannah to farming in the forests.
The DNA of the most virulent malaria parasite is similar to that of one which infects
birds; and this may have been where the disease came from. Malaria has spread all
over the world wherever there are wet places for the mosquitoes to breed. It was once
common in East Anglia; Norwich City football team wears yellow jerseys because the
local population were once called “yellow-bellies” after the jaundice caused by
chronic malaria. It killed James I and Oliver Cromwell; and Sir Walter Raleigh on the
scaffold was concerned that his trembling might be interpreted as fear rather than
what it was: malaria.
Malaria kills millions, but far more people are infected by the disease than die of it.
There seems to be an uneasy coexistence between disease and host. The parasite does
much of its damage by breaking in to red blood cells and digesting them. The way in
which humanity has coped with malaria demonstrates the strengths and weaknesses of
natural selection better than anything else. All kinds of defences have appeared; often
different ones in different places. Some are effective, some less so; and some impose
a terrible cost on those who use them.
Evolution has fought back against several of malaria’s stages. To get into the red cell,
the parasite must stick to it. One form of malaria uses a particular blood group on the
surface of cells as the attachment site. In West Africa, many people carry a gene
which alters the shape of this site so that the parasite cannot attach. They are protected
against the disease.
The most widespread trick which evolution has come up with in its battle against
malaria involves changes to the red-blood pigment, haemoglobin. There are dozens of
these. In some places in West Africa, up to a third of children carry one or two copies
of a gene for an altered haemoglobin known as sickle cell. This is due to a single
change in one of the amino acids, the building blocks which make up the red blood
pigment. When a cell from someone carrying this gene is attacked by a parasite, the
haemoglobin forms fibres and the cell collapses, slowing the growth of the parasite.
This is very effective: a child with a single copy of a sickle cell gene has a 90 per cent
protection against severe malaria.
In India and the Middle East there are mutations which change other amino acids in
the haemoglobin and act in much the same way - the suicide of cells invaded by the
malaria parasites. Some populations - such as those in Italy and Cyprus - have
evolved more drastic defences. Whole sections of the haemoglobin molecule are
4

deleted and, once again, this slows the growth of the parasite, should it invade.
The picture looks pretty complicated already. Recently we have started using DNA to
look in more detail at what is going on, and things have got even more complex. What
seemed to be the same defence mechanism in separate places turn out to be
genetically quite different. For example, there are at least 20 - and perhaps many more
- distinct deletions of bits of the haemoglobin chain, and several different protective
cell-surface cues. Hundreds of different mutations have been pressed into service in
the struggle against malaria world-wide. It also looks as if the same mechanism sickle cell, for example - has turned up independently in populations a long way apart.
There are even a few small patches of sickle cell haemoglobin in Europe, where in
some places, and very surprisingly, the gene is carried by people with white skins.
One of these is in the town of Coruche, in central Portugal, where malaria was once
common. Although most of the DNA of these people is similar to that of other
Europeans, the DNA around the sickle cell gene itself is of a type only found in West
Africa.
What seems to have happened is that Portuguese explorers in Africa went in for interracial mating. Their children - together with their sickle cell genes - were brought
back to Portugal. The gene protected those carrying it against the local disease,
malaria, so that this particular African gene flourished and spread, although those for
black skin were absorbed into the local population and, after hundreds of years, lost
from sight.
As it happens, I am writing this while watching on the television crowds around the
Russian Parliament building throwing up barricades after the coup against Mikhail
Gorbachev. They grab whatever is at hand to make a rough and ready barrier which,
even if it does not stop the tanks, may slow them down. Natural selection responds to
malaria in much the same way. Whenever a mutation which might be useful turns up,
it is used to try and halt the invader. In different places, different genes become
available, and the first one at hand is used even if it is not the best.
When faced with an emergency, people often turn to expedients which turn out to be
expensive. Malaria shows that evolution does the same thing. Some of the protective
mechanisms damage the populations which have taken advantage of them. When the
sickle cell mutation first appeared it was rare, so that nearly every copy was partnered
by a matching copy of the unchanged gene; a combination which protects against
malaria and leaves its carriers in good general health.
As it became more common, people with two copies of the altered gene - one from
each parent - appeared. They suffer from sickle cell anaemia, a severe disease which
can kill. Their red cells collapse even when the parasite has not entered them, giving
rise to a range of crippling symptoms. These include brain damage, heart failure and
paralysis. In some places, around one child in 10 is born with this condition.
This is a high price to pay for protection against malaria, but it is unavoidable once a
population starts using the sickle cell gene. Some of the other genetic mechanisms for
fighting malaria involve the same cost. As more than one person in 20 world-wide
carries one or other of these genes, hundreds of thousands of children with inherited
anaemias are born each year. Again this does not give us much confidence in the idea
of a benign designer.
5

The malaria story says some useful things about evolution. Far from designing a
simple and effective protection, whenever a straw appeared selection clutched at it.
Selection acted like a handyman rather than a craftsman. Its products often seem to be
amazingly badly - not to say extravagantly - planned and roughly made. If man is
indeed made in God’s image, it does not say much for divine engineering.
This haphazard approach has its strengths. It can provide subtle and unexpected ways
of dealing with problems. Engineers themselves use it. To design a fan blade in a jet
engine is not easy. One way is to make a version which works reasonably well, and
then to make some random changes to it. Test these, choose the best, and change that
a bit. A few cycles generates an effective blade, sometimes with a surprising shape.
The logic of selection has done what it does in the living world: it has produced a
complicated design without a designer. Just this approach is used by computer
programmers, and soon most advanced computer programs may evolve through
something very like natural selection.
However, this process has never in three billion years produced a fan blade or even a
wheel, let alone a watch - although it has managed to generate eyes, brains and other
organs of great complexity. This is because of its greatest weakness: its plodding
approach. A wheel, or a watch, needs some long-term ideas. There is no such thing as
a first tentative step. To make a watch or even a wheel demands an intellectual leap
which selection cannot make. Natural selection has superb tactics, but no strategy.
Although its methods are clumsy, selection can do remarkable things. There have
been many claims that malaria and other insect-borne diseases will be defeated by
human ingenuity. The mosquitoes have been sprayed with insecticides, the parasites
attacked with drugs. Both have fought back. All over the world, insects are resistant to
chemicals and parasites to anti-malarial drugs. Their counter-attack has been so
effective that a meeting in Washington a few weeks ago heard that malaria is raging at
unprecedented levels. Each year, 300 million people in 102 different countries are
infected - far more than 20 years ago.
Selection has helped the insects to muddle through. They have done so in much the
same way as humans have. There are new mutations which break down insecticides,
or prevent them from getting in. Some allow the insect to store the poison, some
change the shape of the target molecule and others enable the insect to avoid places
which have been sprayed. Our genetic mechanisms for avoiding malaria will be
needed for a long time yet.
In the early days of malaria control after the war, it seemed almost certain that malaria
would soon be conquered. The disease turned out to be a subtle and effective enemy.
But other diseases have gone for ever. Some optimists claim that the conquest of
disease, cold and starvation means that natural selection has come to an end. If there
is one general rule to be learnt from evolution, it is to expect the unexpected. It is
quite possible that new diseases will appear and cause just as much damage as
malaria. Some genetic diseases may, like sickle cell, be common in some places
because of diseases which have now gone. One Ashkenazi Jew in 30 is a carrier of the
gene for Tay-Sachs Disease, an unpleasant and fatal degeneration of the nervous
6

system. Families carrying this gene seem to have had ancestors more resistant to
tuberculosis than the average. As TB was common in the European ghettos from
whence they came, we may have here the relic of a system which looks very much
like sickle cell anaemia.
Natural selection will probably not go away. The environment will continue to
change, new mutations to appear, and populations to outstrip resources. Life in the
modern world is very different from that in the past. The way in which evolution
works may change.
Ten thousand years ago, the struggle for existence really meant something. Skeletons
from cave cemeteries show that few people lived to be more than 20. If ancient
fertility was anything like that found in modern tribal groups each female had about
eight children; most of whom died young. For nine-tenths of human evolution society
was like a village school, with lots of infants, plenty of teenagers and a few - probably
harassed - adult survivors.
Few modern peoples are as fertile as we used to be. The Hutterites in North America
wish for the largest possible family for religious reasons, but even they, living in a
healthy society, rarely have more than ten children. For most of human history it
seems that we have had as many children as is biologically possible, and only recently
has that number begun to decrease.
But only in the past few years have humans lived as long as they are able. In the West,
average life expectancy has nearly doubled over the past century, largely because we
have beaten childhood disease. For the first time in history, most people die old,
perhaps as old as is possible. Life expectancy has risen from 47 to 75 years in the past
century. Progress has now stopped, for some social classes at least. In the USA in
1979, white women of 65 could expect to live for another 18½ years. Today, in 1991,
the figure is exactly the same. Even if we eliminated all infectious diseases and all
accidental deaths, average life expectancy would now go up by only a couple of years.
George Bernard Shaw was wrong. There is not much chance that we will go back to
Methuselah.
There is still room for progress, largely because of class differences in health. A baby
born to an unskilled worker in Britain can expect to live for eight years less than one
born to a professional person; a difference which, to our national shame, is actually
increasing. The prospects for any dramatic improvements in longevity seem dim.
What kills us off prematurely nowadays is not infection, but things like lung cancer
and coronary heart disease. There are genes which affect the chance of smokers
getting cancer or emphysema. Others alter the chance of those with a fatty diet dying
of heart disease. Selection may continue to act on such genes. It will not be as
powerful as the sort of selection which has acted to build up defences against malaria.
Diseases like cancer usually kill people after they have had children and passed on the
genes which killed them.
This shift in the pattern of life and death is a recent one. There have been about 6,000
generations since we first appeared on earth. The new balance between birth and
survival has happened only in the last 20 or so. It means that natural selection has
changed the way it works. We have fewer children than ever before, but most of last
7

until the biological clock runs down. If everyone born had the same number of
children at the same age and all those children survived, every gene would have the
same chance of being passed on and there would be no selection. Nowhere in the
world has this kind of society. However, in affluent countries the differences between
families in how many people survive and in the number of children have decreased.
There is hence much less opportunity for selection in Britain now than even a century
ago.
For example, the chance of a baby living to the age of 15 is now 98 per cent, so that
selection acting through childhood death has almost disappeared. Even 30 years ago
babies who weighed 1lb less or 1lb more than the average at birth were much more
likely to die. Now this effect has nearly disappeared. Selection no longer has much
influence on birth weight.
There are still quite large differences in family size; so that selection can act through
differences in how fertile people are. Selection of this kind shot up as birth control
first became popular. The upper classes adopted the idea well before the lower orders,
with the French aristocracy catching on first and reducing the number of children per
marriage from six to two in only 100 years. In Victorian times, the variation in
fertility between families was striking; Mr Quiverful in the Barchester novels had a
dozen children at a time when the other clergymen were discreetly limiting their
families to two or three. Now that birth control is widespread, the differences between
families has dropped again. But selection working through variation in the number of
children born is still - for the first time in human history - much greater than that
working on the number that survive.
Nearly all the forces of selection we understand best - disease, climate or starvation act mainly on survival rather than family size. The shift in the balance between the
two may bring in new and unpredictable forces of change. Perhaps the age of
reproduction will become important. There has been a rapid drop in the age at which
girls become sexually mature. In opposition, Western women now marry five years
later than they did 50 years ago. Any inherited tendency to marry early or late - or to
limit family size - could become a potent agent of evolution.
What this will do to the future of human evolution is hard to say. These new patterns
of life have only appeared in the past few generations, too soon to have any real
effect. A good general rule in evolution is that nobody gets a free lunch: success in
one walk of life must be paid for by failure in another. Experiments on fruit flies
suggest that a shift away from the ability to survive when young and towards selection
on fertility involves a trade-off: flies which produce lots of eggs are worse at
surviving the difficulties of youth. Perhaps in time humans too may become a race of
fertile monsters with childcare problems, but this is speculation and none of us will be
around for long enough to see it happen.
Whatever the long-term outcome of natural selection, there is no reason to think that
evolution will change its tactics. Rather than making a dramatic new start, designing
the ideal solution for a particular problem - a design which may not be ideal for very
long - it will build on our imperfections, just as it did in the struggle against malaria.
History gives us little reason to hope that natural selection will act as the agent of
human perfectibility. No doubt selection of some kind will continue to direct our own
8

future, but one thing is certain: it will never make humanity superhuman.

9

