REITH LECTURES 1991: The Language of the Genes
Steve Jones
Lecture 4: The Economics of Eden
TRANSMISSION: 4 December 1991 – BBC Radio 4

Renaissance painters on religious themes had a problem: when they showed Adam
and Eve, should they have navels? If they did, then surely it was blasphemous, as it
implied that they must have had a mother. If they did not, then it looked silly.
Although some compromised with a strategic piece of shrubbery, this did not really
solve the problem. And where was the Garden of Eden? Various theories had it in
Israel, Africa, and even the United States.
When it existed seemed more obvious; adding up the ages of the descendants of the
primal couple given in the Bible set the beginning of history as October 23 4004 BC.
The reason for leaving Eden was also clear: Adam and Eve had, with the help of an
apple, learnt to do something new, and as a punishment were forced out into the
world. No longer could they depend on a God-given supply of food falling into their
hands. Instead, they had to make a living for themselves. The first economy was born.
This lecture is about the escape from Eden: about colonising the world, and how
genetic change is linked to economic development. It has long been realised that there
are ties between the theories of economics and those of evolution. Economics is often
seen as a kind of enlightened self-interest. The desire to increase one’s own wealth
may, as Adam Smith has it, be the foundation of all social progress. Exactly the same
argument has been used by some evolutionists. Genes are seen as “selfish”; anxious to
promote their own interests - sometimes even at the expense of their carriers. In its
most naïve form, this view of life is used to explain - or at least to excuse - spite,
sexism, nationalism, racism, and the economic and political systems which grow from
them.
Darwin was greatly influenced by reading the works of the early economist Malthus,
who argued that populations will inevitably outgrow resources. Karl Marx sent him a
copy of Das Kapital which was found unread after Darwin’s death. Marx in a letter to
his colleague Engels, three years after The Origin of Species was published, went so
far as to say: “It is remarkable how Darwin recognises among beasts and plants his
English society with its division of labour, competition, opening up of new markets,
inventions and the Malthusian struggle for existence”. Engels took it further. In his
essay, The Part Played By Labour In The Transition From Ape To Man, he argued
that an economic change, the use of hands to make things, was crucial to the origin of
humans. Recent discoveries in genetics show that much of our evolution is indeed, as
Engels said, linked to social advance.
However, far from society being driven by its genes, it seems that social and
economic changes have produced many of the genetic patterns we see in the world
today. Since modern humans first appeared, 100,000 years and more ago, every
technical advance has led to a shift in the pattern of evolution and to genetic changes
which can persist for thousands of years. It seems that society drives genes rather than
genes driving society.
1

Many of the clues about the economics of evolution came from work on human
fossils. Palaeontologists still do not agree about where Eden really was, where modern
humans came from and when we arrived. The fossil record is so incomplete that a
cynic might feel that the main lesson to be learnt from palaeontology is that evolution
usually takes place somewhere else. The origin of humanity has been claimed as
being in Asia, Africa, and even the whole world at the same time. Darwin always felt
that humans came from Africa, and most of the fossils do point there. However, those
who study human fossils still have plenty of problems to sort out.
There are many African fossils of our ancient relatives such as the famous Lucy,
which are millions of years old. Not until around 120,000 years ago do skulls which
look like modern humans appear; some of the first in caves from North Africa and
slightly later on the Klasies River in South Africa. There are other skulls of about the
same age from Israel. Last year a 50,000 year old site showing signs of human
occupation was found in Northern Australia, near the place where we probably landed
for the first time. It took us longer to get from Africa to Europe than it did to
Australia. One of the earliest Europeans, Cro-Magnon, lived, like a sensible man, in
the South of France. The first Americans probably did not arrive until 15,000 years
ago across the Bering land bridge from Siberia, although this picture is confused by
claims of much older rock art in Brazil.
The fossils show that almost as soon as they evolved, humans began to move. Why,
we do not know. Perhaps economics had something to do with it. The Sahara Desert
was once a grassy plain. It dried up about 100,000 years ago, so that food shortage
may have driven us out of Africa. There are some clues about what these earliest
economies were like. They seem to have been pretty simple. People used what nature
provided until it ran out. All over the world there are fossils of large and tasty animals
which were driven to extinction soon after humans arrived. In Siberia so many
mammoths were killed that the hunters made houses from their bones. In Australia
too, there was a shift from forests to grasslands as the first humans burned their way
across the continent.
The common large mammal in Europe and the near East at the time was a relative of
ours, Neanderthal man, who had lived there quite happily for 200,000 years. Fairly
soon after the invasion of modern humans, Neanderthal disappeared. Why, we can
only guess: the guesses range from genocide to interbreeding. The first is unlikely: in
France, at the cave of St Cesaire, near modern Cannes, Neanderthals and moderns
seem to have lived quite close to each other for many years. The second is probably
wrong: modern Europeans do not differ enough from other peoples to suggest that
they retain Neanderthal genes gained from interbreeding.
Perhaps economic pressure did the job. There was a period when Neanderthals
seemed to pick up some of the technology of modern humans. But the moderns had
tools made of bone and ivory when their relatives still had to make do with stone.
Modern humans were better at exploiting what was available, so that their populations
grew faster, driving Neanderthals out.
By 10,000 years ago, humans had filled the world; but there were only about as many
of us altogether as live in London today. We can get some idea of what life was like
by looking at modern tribal peoples, who retain remnants of an economy based - as in
2

ancient times - on hunting animals and gathering plants. The Yanomamo Indians of
South America have been much used in this way. They live in the Amazon Basin - or
at least they used to live there before mining destroyed their lives. They call
themselves “the fierce people”, with good reason. The commonest cause of death is
violence; and their society is not stable enough to allow more than about 100 people
to stay together. Any larger group splits, so that the Yanomamo exist in a series of
small bands. These are in constant conflict: rape, murder and theft are common.
Social systems based on hunting and gathering - as all were for 90 per cent of human
history - may have been like this. It is dangerous to make too much of what one tribal
culture like the Yanomamo does. Others, such as the bushmen, are far better behaved.
But there is one odd fact about modern society which may be trying to tell us
something about the past. This is that most team efforts involve about the same
number of people. There are 11 men on a football team, 12 on a jury, 14 on the
politburo, 9 on the US Supreme Court - and Jesus, of course, had 12 apostles. Each
Yanomamo band has, oddly enough, about 12 healthy adult males. Is this a hint about
society during most of history? Social life certainly seems to have looked a bit like
this for the hunters who made the first journeys across the world. The size of the
mammoth-bone houses in Siberia, for example, shows that each band had only about
50 people altogether; that is about a dozen adult males.
Strange things happen to genes in small populations like these. We can get an idea of
what by looking at one inherited character; a surname. This passes from father to son,
rather like a gene. There are more than a million surnames in the world, some
stretching back for 2,000 years. Imagine a village founded by a dozen married couples
each with a different name. By chance some have more sons, some less. Perhaps one
couple has no sons at all. Their name is then lost. In time, over the generations, some
names become rare, some common. In different villages different names take over,
and the communities diverge from each other. In Italy, for example, we often find that
nearly everyone in a village has the same name, while everyone in the hamlet down
the road has a different one.
The same thing happens to genes. Small and isolated groups diverge genetically from
each other. Yanomamo bands a few miles apart can have quite different frequencies
of ABO blood-group genes, for example. Italian villages, particularly small ones in
isolated mountain valleys, also diverge genetically even though they have only existed
for a few hundred years. A lot of human evolution must have happened like this evolution by accident, as it were. Einstein once said that “God does not play dice”. He
was wrong: for genes, God does.
Random genetic changes such as these often happen when people leave their native
land - usually for economic reasons - and set up a community somewhere else. The
emigrants often form a very small group, a tiny sample of the people they left behind.
The new colony may grow into a population of thousands. All of them will carry only
the names, and of course the genes, of the first founders. If there were just a few of
these, the new population may be quite different from those who stayed at home.
We can see this process at work all over the world. Plenty of people have sought
fortune by emigrating. The Afrikaners are a classic example. They began their
migration into Africa from Europe in the 1650s. There are now 2½ million of them in
South Africa. The founders brought several names drawn at random from the Dutch
3

population. A million of today’s Afrikaners share just 20 names - Botha being one and this fits what we know about the number of families among the first migrants.
These migrants also brought, without knowing it, some rare genes, drawn by chance like their names - from the people of Holland. One woman, Geerit van Jansz, must
have carried a single copy of the gene for porphyria, an inherited disorder which is
dangerous when certain drugs are used. This gene is rare in Europe. However, 30,000
of Geerit van Jansz’s South African descendants have it. In Johannesburg there are
more cases of porphyria than there are in the whole of Holland. We can tell from the
names and the genes that the Afrikaners are the descendents of a tiny group, a small
sample of a large population which itself has now grown into a successful economy.
We can get an idea of how small the bottlenecks actually were by looking at the
pattern of genes in the ancestral and emigrant populations. Let’s illustrate this with
surnames again. If we count the number of names in a population, we can get an idea
of how many people founded it and how much immigration there has been since then.
The Afrikaners show how this works. There are several times as many different
surnames per page in the phone book in their native Dutch cities than in
Johannesburg. The reason is obvious: most of the Afrikaner phone owners descend
from a small founding group with a few names. The Afrikaner disease porphyria is
called Van Druin (ph) disease in South Africa because so many sufferers have that
family name. By counting surnames or genes and doing some statistical juggling, we
can get an idea of just how many founders there were.
The order of letters in the DNA alphabet - the DNA sequence, that is - is in some
ways itself a “genetic surname”; a set of inherited letters which pass together down
the generations. We can use the information coded in the DNA surname to estimate
the number of founders in any population by comparing its sequence with that of its
ancestors. Only one section of our DNA - the piece around the genes which code for
haemoglobin - has been looked at world-wide; but the results are startling.
All populations outside Africa, from Britain to Tahiti, share a few common genetic
surnames. Within Africa, there is a different pattern of DNA surname distribution.
Just like the names in the Johannesburg telephone directory, the shift in pattern is
probably a relic of a population bottleneck when humans emigrated from one
continent to another long ago - this time from, rather than to, Africa. We can do some
statistics and make a lot of guesses to work out the size of this bottleneck on the first
escape from Africa 100,000 years ago. It turns out that the whole of the world’s
population outside Africa may descend from a group of less than 100 people which
left their native continent. There may be a glimmer of truth in the Adam and Eve
story, after all: but it is only a glimmer.
Just the same seems to have happened when humans first reached the Americas. DNA
patterns suggest that all American Indians descend from a few, perhaps less than 10,
genetic lineages which trace back to the small band who invaded 15,000 years ago.
The small number of founders and the brief period since they arrived means that
native Americans from Alaska to Cape Horn are more alike than people separated by
only a few miles in other parts of the world. Genes help us to make other guesses
about ancient societies. They show that there have been real differences in the
evolution - and perhaps the economic position - of the sexes throughout human
history. Males have a chromosome - the Y chromosome - which is not found in
females. It is passed from father to son. This chromosome is far less genetically
4

variable than any other. For the Y, most men world-wide have just one of a few DNA
sequences.
One reason for the reduced variation in this male line compared to those genes carried
by both sexes may have to do with the social structure of ancient times. In most
societies, there is a lot of variation in the reproductive success of individual men:
there are a few Casanovas who monopolise many of the females, and lots of people
like you or me who do not get their fair share. Often, the most successful males are
those who have the most wealth and social position. Take the Yanomamo for
example. In one village four of the men had more than 40 grandchildren, while 28 had
only one and many more had none at all. Women, on the other hand, tended each to
have roughly the same numbers of children. This means that fewer males than females
pass on their genes each generation; the population of Y chromosomes is smaller than
that of genes which pass down through both sexes. Variation on the Y may have been
lost because of a series of repeated population bottlenecks as the chromosome passed
through that small proportion of men who are socially and sexually successful and
have lots of children.
Societies and economies based on small groups began to disappear 10,000 years ago
because of a dramatic change in the world economy - the origin of agriculture. Before
then, the world population was only about 10 million. Humans ate dozens of kinds of
animals and plants. Our diet is now more restricted - but there is a lot more food
about.
Farming started at roughly the same time in several places. Wheat was first cultivated
in the Middle East; rice in China; and maize in South America. The effect was always
the same. There was a population explosion. Before farming, each person needed
about a square mile to feed himself. After it, 100 people could live off the same area.
Farming took 4,000 years to cross Europe. It arrived in Britain about 3000BC. The
local hunter-gatherers suffered a process of gentrification - or even yuppification - as
an economically advanced people, the farmers, moved in on them. It is easy to
imagine the complaints of the natives as the newcomers with their new-fangled ways
and hi-tech imports disrupted their rural idyll. Life in southern England 5,000 years
ago probably had quite a lot in common with that depicted in The Archers today.
Just like The Archers, social barriers did not stop people from mating. A genetic map
based on about two dozen variable genes shows clear trends across Europe. Most of
these are from south-east to north-west, from Greece to Ireland. This map looks very
like one of the spread of farming. Farmers advanced at about one kilometre per year,
probably by founding new farms at the edge of their expanding population.
They bred with the local hunters, and, because the farmers were so much more
numerous, absorbed their genes. This process began in the Balkans and was
completed thousands of years later on the western fringes of Europe. We, the British,
contain more hunting genes than do, say, the Greeks, who had rolled over the earlier
economy and absorbed its genes long before.
The genetic map of Europe has one striking anomaly: the Basques, who do not fit at
all into the general pattern. They seem to have resisted the new farming technology
for thousands of years, and are still distinct from all other Europeans. They are closer
to our hunting ancestors than anyone else.
5

Farming is based on the ownership of land. It did not take long for this to pass into
fewer and fewer hands and for groups of people to work together to try to steal
resources from others. The first nation state was born. From the Old Testament to
Mein Kampf, history has seen mass movement as the key to the peoples of the world.
But marauding nations began to shape genetic history only in the past few thousand
years; before then, genes seem to have moved by gradual diffusion rather than by the
conquest of one state by another.
Throughout modern Europe we can see patches of genes which reflect the successes,
and failures, of nations and economies long gone. Three thousand years ago Greece
was the most densely populated country in Europe. The enterprising Greeks spread
from their home to form Greater Greece - Magna Graecia - an empire which extended
from the Caucasus to Spain. Forty towns in southern Italy were Greek, including
Syracuse, then the biggest city in the world. If we look at the genetics, it turns out that
today’s southern Italians and Sicilians are still genetically distinct from their
compatriots to the north and share many genes with the population of modern Greece.
Their genes remain as witnesses to their history.
The Greeks are still around to remind us of the past. At about the time of the Greek
Empire there was another buoyant economy in central Italy - that of the Etruscans,
now a byword for obscurity. They lived in cities of up to half a million people and
were skilled metal workers. Until recently all that seemed to be left were some
enigmatic sculptures and a few inscriptions which we could scarcely read. Now we
know that their heritage has not been lost. Between the River Arno and the Tiber is a
region whose genes show it to be distinct from its neighbours. These are the genes of
the Etruscan nation, which lives on its descendents, although its language, its
economy and its culture have all disappeared.
Nations usually define themselves by sharing a language. There are some 5,000
different languages in the world; and many more, like Etruscan, which are extinct.
Just like genes, languages evolve: they accumulate mutations. Like genes, the changes
in language can give clues about history. Sometimes they are scarcely noticeable.
England can be divided into zones defined by whether people do or do not pronounce
the final letter “r” in words such as “car”. I do not. I say car. I was brought up in
Wales and on Merseyside, but plenty of those listening in Cornwall, Lincolnshire or
Northumbria will pronounce it as “carr”. This seems trivial. But such tiny differences
can mount up until there is a barrier to the exchange of information and a new
language, which often marks a new economy, is born.
We can see this in Europe. A Portuguese farmer can no more understand a Venetian
than we can; but he can talk to his Spanish neighbour, who can converse with his
Catalan cousin, who in turn is linked to Italy through the langue d’oc in southern
France. The chain of dialects reflects a history of shared descent tracing back to the
Roman Empire. We can sometimes guess at what the ancestral languages must have
sounded like. Father, padre and pere are obviously related words. They all descend
from the same word, which sounded something like pater, and means that the phrase
God the Father can appear both as Deus Patris and Jupiter; or, in Sanskrit, as Dyau
Pitar. A family tree of European languages shows that nearly all of them are related.
This, the Indo-European family, also includes Indian languages such as Bengali and
extinct tongues like Sanskrit.
6

A genetic map of Europe shows that many language boundaries are also regions of
genetic change. In Wales, there are genetic differences between Welsh and English
speakers; and the population of Orkney - whose native language is a Scandinavian
one - is biologically different from that of the rest of Scotland. Even dialects may
mark such barriers. In France, there is a definite genetic step between those who speak
the langue d’oc southern French and speakers of the northern langue d’oil. Genes and
language are telling the same story about history.
Just like their genes, the language of the Basques seems to be unrelated to any other.
It may be the last remnant of the speech of Europe before agriculture. Safe in their
mountains, the Basques resisted being absorbed by the invaders, so that their ancient
language, the speech of the hunter-gatherers, lives on. Archaeology, too, shows that
they took up farming much later than the rest of Europe. However, this last remnant
of a European hunting economy is under threat. Today, Basque genes stretch for
much further than the language: east to Zaragoza, now a Spanish city, and north into
France. Their economy was destroyed long ago; now their language and culture is
finally being squeezed out by modern society. Like the Etruscans, who also spoke a
non Indo-European language, soon only their genes will be left.
Of course there are plenty of cases, particularly in the modern world, where genes tell
us more about ancestry than does language. Genes persist for far longer and can tell us
much more about the past. We see this in the Etruscans and the Basques, and over a
much shorter time in modern Britons whose genes come from Europe, Africa, India,
and even China, but whose language is overwhelmingly English.
Where did the Indo-European languages now spoken by half the people of the world
come from? They can sound very different. I cannot vouch for my pronunciation, but
“Our father, who art in heaven” is “Ein Tad, yr hwn wyt yn y nefoedd” in Welsh,
“Patera mas, pou eisai stous ouranous” in Greek, “Otche nash, suscij na nebesach” in
Russian, and “He hamare svargbast pita” in Hindi.
They don’t sound very similar. But it is possible to find some shared words and to use
these to guess where the languages originated. There are several widely shared terms
for domestic animals and crops - the ancient term for sheep, owis, is in the Latin ovis,
Sanskrit avis, and English ewe. There are shared words for corn, yoke, horse and
wheel too.
Perhaps, then, the first Indo-Europeans were farmers, who brought their language
with them as they spread. Just where they lived is not clear. The homeland may have
been north of the Black Sea or in eastern Turkey. The Indo-Europeans may even have
been the first farmers. Language, archaeology and genes all bear witness to an
invasion of Europe from the East. An economic breakthrough - farming - drove
culture, genes and speech into modern Europe.
Exactly the same sort of thing happened elsewhere. Rice growers of the Far East took
their language as well as their genes with them as they filled the Pacific, and at one
time this Austronesian language family was the most widespread of all, spreading
from Madagascar to Hawaii. In Africa, farmers spread south, filling western and
southern parts of Africa with Bantu speakers. Wherever society was transformed by
technology, genetic change - evolution - followed.
7

Today’s most important technical and economic advances are in communication. We
can now speak to anyone in the world as soon as they can get to a telephone. New
work on global patterns of language suggests that the first technical revolution of all,
the one that began our move from Eden, may also have involved a breakthrough in
communication.
We can make a family tree of the peoples of the world based on the patterns of
genetic change which have built up through mutation over the past 100,000 years.
Africans form a distinct and ancient branch of the lineage. American Indians group
together with their Asiatic ancestors, and Australia and New Guinea are a separate set.
A family tree of languages can be made in the same way with French, Italian and
Spanish, for example, grouping close together into the-Indo European family.
There is a new - and controversial - claim that all the different languages of the world
can be classified into just 17 distinct families; the 1,000 or so native languages of the
Americas falling into only three. We can make a tree showing the relationships of all
the languages and even guess - wildly - at some of the original words at the base of
them all tens of thousands of years ago. Tik, for finger or toe, is one of these words.
Amazingly enough, when the language tree is put next to the genetic tree, they look
very similar. Both come to the same root in Africa.
Perhaps this shows that language itself dates back to the very beginning of our
species: and even that it was language which made humans human in the first place. It
is hard to imagine any society - let alone a productive economy - which could work
without it. The fossils and the genes have told us where and when Adam met Eve;
soon, we may even be able to guess at what they said to each other.

8

