this is a pull carts from the odd coates of the b. b. c. to greece collects as this letter chat in the season and the language of the genes given by steve jones was originally brought cost in nineteen ninety one by the time he finished us into this toll to be different this until mean by this that your views about life or even about genes will be modified although cups they may well have in mind is simpler in the next casado so your jeans and a life would be changed by mutation fight at risk in your personal genetic message dictation change is happening all the time when it asked elves fund over the generations we constantly being corrupted by origins chevy i did that humanity is in decline for dk tremont what was once perfect committed most of the ten to a higher plane via proceso salvation or starting again from scratch is like jeff is about genetic change the perpetuation of era and how progress can emerge from dk mutation is at the heart of human experience dictates to hold a age and death but also to sex to reinvest its evolution dictation has within itself the answers to the universal question a fake our own decline but humanity salvation professed life in the first genes could get three thousand million years ago has short strings of mona cubes capable of making a roast copies of themselves at a rate as guests of the original molecule and likes this course the primeval soup has passed through three thousand men in our systems to four in the opinion or me or enters chimp or an oak tree the message from our ancestors coated in our genes is liable to be gobbled up during transmission or as a boy i was greatly amused by the tail of the order and getting down the line of command to so he is in the trenches sender inform smith's recurring to advance changed to send three and four punts when going to a dance as a pass from man to man this simple tale illustrates mutation and evolution he chose to send a modification because darwin zone summary of what evolution is all about the ancestral message from the doughnut life has grown to an instruction manual containing three thousand million tons coded into d. n. a. each of us has a unique addition of the manual which differs in millions of waste from back to before loves all this diversity concha mutation from accumulated heiress in copying the fest genetic message like random changes to watch some mutations aha full but most have no effect and you may even be useful to fight a thousand different in borne diseases which are due to mutations some show themselves when there's only one change in the d. n. a. some went to attend to permutations are passed down from each parent in summer when we had a number of changes in different places in the genetic message now that smits has almost concord infectious disease mutations have become more important about one chart infinity born in britain has an even more narrow some current and about a third of all hospital of missions of young children involved a genetic disease summer league damaged genes dissenter mutations which happened long ago but others are mistakes in the sperm or eggs or the parents themselves teacher this carries single copies of two or three different b. tainting genes inherited from assessed this long day in which his two copies of the same one will present would kill us ,comma this is perfect everyone has at least one skeleton teenage medical cover because so many different genes that chance is saying a new mutations in any one of them is small but not a few cases when you're being a reason eight haitians can be spotted in concentrate or just want the full of queen victoria the genetic disease hemophiliac stereotyped and forcing had never been seen in the royal family however several of the descendants of suffolk ,comma the mutation took place in one of her parents in the city and has an unusual pattern of inheritance exhorting x. chromosome females have two x. chromosomes and males just won't tibia in a fairly akbar mail based inherit shorty one copy of the jeans and a female to the disease is as common among boys the goals of this was known to the jews three thousand years ago ,comma but was allowed not to succumb sizes on hippies older brother had bled badly if the operation and more remarkably is assessed as sums have had the same problem several of queen victoria's ransoms what hemophiliacs she herself said that top post family seems persecuted by this disease the west i know the most famous suffer was alexis the summits on nicholas of russia and queen alexandra victorious grand dorton one reason for rescue teams malign influence on the russian court meant being his ability to calm the unfortunate alexis the gene is dissipated in the british or family or there may still be some hemophiliacs among the three hundred descendants of queen victoria who life today somewhat incidentally this acclaimed as another british monarch george the third carried a different mutant gene that closing post area which can lead to mental illness the madness of george the third but canvases to successful appointments was his prime minister lord woolf who was responsible for the loss of the american colonies that ought to respect the both the russian and american revolutions and both presidents gorbachev and bush may result permutations in broil d. n. a. into a match fight is a go custodian humor mutation was largely one of frustration slight timmy erected by anecdotes like these is the intent on its head by the astonishing advances in molecular biology in the old days the early nineteen eighties he on the way to study any human gene was toward gun to fire a patient with a mutation can to try to work out what to call drone in the machinery which makes pro teams today to the change in the d. n. bank was quite unknown this was true for us to live as much as for any other g. fact hemophiliac seemed a rather simple mutation below different patients have selected different symptoms promoted inheritance was straightforward and nearly all seem to shed the same inherited their now kohl sections of d. n. a. from normal in nixon's families can be compared to tell us exactly what happened and things have gone much more complicated to see what mutations can do with the d. n. a. level we need to understand something about how human genes are organized nobody working twenty years ago would have predicted the extraordinary stock should publish human chattel and are about three thousand million d. n. a. bases off full different kinds eight g. c. and t. for short odious to descend to the d. n. a. produces proteins the substance for which our bodies are made up the rest does week know i didn't perhaps it's just junk below it's staying just dismiss something because they conned and started to it's clear that functioning genes make up only a tiny proportion of our d. n. a. became ten i did know how human d. n. a. has organized a power can be diminished with a simple analogy imagined the jennings along the whole of hero to many as being equivalent to one from land's end to john groat spy outland about a thousand miles or together to contain all the d. n. a. letters on the scale to have to be fifty d. n. a. bases that range or about three million per mile although way we passed through twenty three counties to customs sources divisions which conveniently enough of the same in number as the twenty three chromosomes into which our own d. n. a. is packaged the human genome project hopes to complete the journey body it too has been trying but still fall or late ,comma is a distance equivalent to a short wall be tweaked lands' end in the village of santa a couple of miles away as a long way to go yet this same array stuff most of the trip is very tedious liked much or more in britain it seems to be totally on productive headed to exit with the corpses of abandoned genius sometimes the same water content and again about a third of the whole distance is covered by tens of thousands of the peaks corpus same chilled message often just to let us see and a repeated thousands of times that of many models of dole in repetitive d. n. a. to rein be began to see places where something is being made that are about to get a thousand of these genes factories altogether many groups making related products which ones are working to cancel the tissue which they could do in a front in the brain more than hoff of them are producing something walked we usually don't know if other tissues cost europe are active video that d. n. a. into cells which give rise to great blood cells is switched all however one small group or genes is tremendous a busy as a result that better known to finish any of the and much of our understanding of human molecular biology concha work on this particular genetic industrial center that beat adobe genes has been no these genes tell about how far along the total length of our day and a about hopper to german groups in the expects that to make some of the blue becomes the proteins involved in carrying oxygen to clothing and a strong state contains about hoffa doesn't genes making closely related products after making parts of the hemoglobin molecule this small about treating longman oscar if your feet away is another one which makes the clothing found only in the embryo has a right to use the rusting hulk of some equipment which oaxaca once could produce a protein but stopped working years ago to build a factory it covers about a hundred feet tall together most of which seems to be in use space between functional genes it cooperates with another one a long way away neyland damone ,comma fickle map which produces unrelated protein joined together to to make hemoglobin to read but pigment and costing has genetically even more complex in the transport of oxygen a dozen or more different genes scattered all over the general make a production line to manufacture the various factors needed to warm it usually goes wrong in hemophiliac is the gene responsible for making perfected eight affected eight machine has the whole structure on a scale of fifty basis to the amish this single gene is about a hundred feet long fall larger than most of the most of its length does not produce any protein that toll instead the machinery is divided into dozens of different working sections separated by a pitch to d. n. a. which don't called for an f. a. is only enough funny or seems to be a gene with a gene that makes something quite different in the fight date machinery but surprisingly fahy affiliate mutations which one seemed to be a simple genetic change ten set to be much more complicated or cars that mistakes can happen sometimes just one important lesson in the working parts of the gene has changed here should take it to come back to the different hemophiliacs to deter the machinery which joined a functional pieces of the court together seem to be particularly susceptible to accidents kill some hemophiliacs parked or even the whole of affected eight regions has disappeared boast a marketing pitch seems a few patients who suffered from the said is there an extra segment of d. n. a. into the machinery segment whose own message looks like one carried by a virus and other court thing about him if area which we still don't fully understand is that there are many more new mutations in males than in females possibly because the more chances for things to go wrong with the millions of stone produced history who rated mutation to hemophiliac his typical has about one mutation in a functional gene ,comma which makes a protein in sperm or egg defines generations in humans that is about ten million new mutations in working genes that generation in britain which is not a small number yesterday's adams of home tony tuitions may be even higher hormonal changes early in pregnancy suggested eight hundred ten fertilized eggs spontaneously aborted usually without a woman dying testing about to many of these carry lethal you taste just why there's so many mutations we do not know the scene to be lots of ways of increasing the rate in animals radiation such as x. rays has a dramatic effect at the end of the war in the american sent a team of scientists to atomic ball and control commission into hiroshima in u. s. o. p. had tested whether the children of a radio to survivors of the bombs had any new mutations to wilt took forty years in the final report has just appeared in a million jeans were looked at three mutations that found in children whose parents were in the cities when the bombs fell and three among children of those outside the fort so although these people have had more radiation than any other in history that mutation rate does not seem to be increased nevertheless has enough evidence from other animals to make radiation for real course becomes an the biggest avoidable source in britain is ray don't desk which leaks from chronic some people living in crowded house using a callable baby exposed to more excess radio if there are those working in you to prostate chemicals but also important number chromosome huge haitians in new to cast a stone where this is like the grace of a mass of the general public but the number in those working in codifying stations is even higher ,comma three because of a noxious chemicals which ,comma from burning coal some chemicals like those once used to have guys have been found to be powerful near to gems have been banned many others such as those in black pepper when some pesticides also cole's mutations some of the most potent it is to be natural for cynics have argued that organic foods may be more dangerous than food which is being sprayed the cause of the muted jens founded the molds which grow on them even increasing temperature can increase the mutation rate and to colin other regions by waiting to kill technocratic city of aberdeen is probably more than enough to reverse the effects of radon gas as a constant input to mutations has one generation succeeds another most have no effect on those who carry some has to happen in parts of the d. n. a. which did not contain any meaningful constructions to take place pretty much at random and accumulate over the years some o. lost because by chance those who carry them don't have children but that it placed this new mutations ,comma la this balance between games and lost means that the genetic makeup of any lineage changes with time the same thing as a world cup with language as well as a pass from parents to children at risk cricket sometimes the changes disgusting noticeable in shakespeare's has you'd like to talk the court jester makes a speech which course is great amusement but he does what she sets this we may see how the world wags his but are now a ghost to personally hand after one hour on hold to the eleventh and so papaya to out we fry contrite and then ,comma how it to power we draw asked then dropped in bed by hangs a tale just what they should be so funny is lost on one more instance ,comma lest they realize that in shakespeare's time toward halla sounded almost the same asked who would who're change like this horse will but can make a big difference by which use has distinct has been going in english carbonated dale existence became traced with tiny changes to a common ancestor outspoken logo ignition bengali unknowns to course decadence of items of a noble but extinct language dictation has led to divergence knocked dk take the word used to describe kings and queens in sanskrit this was a french latching rex in old lavish hurrying in french or why spanish rage and english royal to be different transmission errors in the pathway needing to reach language such mistakes built up regularly beat and guess at how these various languages spectrum each other is premier of the day to the spirit we can make a linguistic clock in europe this text at a rate which means that two languages still share about eighty percent of their words of thousand years after they split the language clock is an imperfect world somewhere scares to change what others shift more quickly than the less it can be used to trace the origin of modern times even though that pass astros because alone did weaken compared genes in the same way to get a molecular clock to chris aon took dictation state base regularly weakens or treat consecrated espy to cannibals just this weekend between leverage is the widow from fossils when creatures last shared a common ancestor we can estimate the rate at which the monica talk takes her book after this the day to spitting puppet of the evolving many agents to identify molecular talk didn't buy mutation is a beautifully simple as usual the more we learn the more complicated it gets a clock speeds up and slows down and takes a dip in traits to differentiate its unequal and confusion wants to be kidding rustic society of paris to ban discussion of the origin of language is this that may have been some spectacular failures by molecular clock makers to see the biological war talk could be further street trees however they've also had some triumphs wannabes his spy sad accident bound up with the story of hemophiliac any less area affected eight chief is not working properly for two years ago it became possible to treat him a fedex this factor eight from donated blood in britain this was both to the united states in a kind of blood donation system is a commercial one many of those involved with drug addicts who sell their blood ,comma which was contaminated with the aid to progress in the west about fifteen thousand hemophiliacs treated this way when infected phnom but he's much smaller in britain but some have already died the aids virus is tiny with the genetic message of only about ten thousand jackson's professed american cases of aids began to appear in the late nineteen seventies the disease persists in iran before then the d. n. a. in a pickle specimen from a sailor who died in manchester in nineteen fifty nine shows that his death in a mystery was in fact due to hates since then millions of people have been infected millions wolf assessment to die when to be a tortoise ,comma from when to press began to attack us the absent concha new patient in the molecular clock the finest reproduce is so quickly that evolution can be studied over quite short periods its d. n. a. sequence can even change within a single person during the course of infection if we use the d. n. a. from aids patients to get to talk to the world to make it tree automated none s. it seems that the ancestral virus came from africa and spread via haiti to the united states and then to europe because we know when the festive factions appeared to take place becomes sector rate which the aids molecular clock ticks as many as fifty mutations that can be done to me to any age he cheated compellingly genes of the aides thought us with those of others shows that it is related to some bars is which infect monkeys grab coursing too much damage its closest relative attacks the sorting and debate the west african monkey deep a taste of clock based on comparing genes in human aids virus is that those in the monkey of artists' suggests that the most important agent of eight stocks picked up from its recess that unabated humans in the nineteenth century hwang we don't know but which is why this is kind of people change over the generations by accumulating mutations that they make this change when that didn't generate a tawdry can see much progress since it is not the case but that the individual is more so as we age ,comma she noted the case until it finally breaks down parts of this decadence concert mutation within our own bodies to make a human being through precise date involves making lots of copies of the genetic message with a ten to chances for mistakes most cells continue to divide red blood cells are renewed every four months or so for example as a result of each of us accumulates millions of new mutations in a body cells during allied's this means that if they want is a need to do the voting system whose identity changes from day to day some of these mutations ,comma leaked to disaster many tests as result of genetic accidents spiteri shuns similar to those we treated him borne disease we all have a hundred or so specialized genes which control the growth of sales when they mutate cells may multiply i only told of the justice inhibited alvord carson mistakes can happen a single d. n. a. base may change our whole sections of the message the last occasionally and amazingly buses carry cancer genes similar to those of humans having set coming to our own deanna age itself is a fact the same terms as possible in a spot in the course of steve though d. n. a. replication peeled away optimal to dishes that are being in the more chances for mistakes the cells of the newborn baby ,comma separated by only a few hundred divisions from the egg that minded distance from u. by thousands of white jeans have had more chances to mutate which is why it can sell his loss to a disease of old people to biological identity crisis which reduce china's old age which is sold by daft happens when the genetic message has become so degenerate cookie instructions no longer make sense just like making a series of food to copies went to the other for that information is lost each time a cell divides parts of the message disappeared with time and d. n. a. is packaged into units called chromosomes each has a specialized things could get a package sent diskettes shorter when they each get a baby gets about twenty thousand leftist along one of us sixty erol interest cost this about format doesn't draw from this section of the message each time a cell divides solicit old body is working from an imperfect instruction manual full of printing errors age may be due to the accumulation of genetic accidents human cells in culture age more quickly when they carry a defect which increases the mutation rate in some children who inherit a tendency toward cancer also grow more rapidly it seems that the d. k. about aging selves is due to mutations h. also increases the number of mutations in sperm and egg is school more than an accident that victoria's father leopold duke of albany potatoes or ghost testicles the humorous fed a mutation prodi to pace is more than fifty when she was born his exit age can be striking the chromosome mutation which gives rise to down syndrome is fifty times ,comma among mothers older than forty five compared to those under twenty one all this had to sit in on it to the claims of one institution devoted to personally dk of the human race sent to the genital choice in california in which the nobel prize winners make genetic deposits for hopeful mark this depositors may once have approached genetic affection but because they are also made a profession is being mauled by age wyatt in tight jeans change indicates or lives as the human race will degenerate has won a generation succeeds another gas supply as it seems in sex to different sex is simple is away imitating genes from different ancestors to be brought together in the same goes for it to get used to give it up to take the humble potato for example that a potato for the ticket overrides the but say the king edward to be said about royal themed is identical to every other week or so has the same set of genes is a hoary ancestor of all potatoes are betting that name this is very convenient for the pharma and grosso which is what sex is not a college damone potatoes king edward himself is a very different to fish off his jeans came from his mother hoff permits ,comma and he was a new and unique genetic mix to combine some of the qualities of the two and opened at a widening pool of more distant ancestors patchwork sexiest or why is it that this at a loss if it develops that journals have given up sex field this adult fish but known about close of a tips even crutches like green fly which marriage without it from most of the time feel the need for about a sex once a year or so the franc cancer is so we don't really know what sex is full it must be important is it so expensive it means that a female was a waste of time producing psalms to carry on hoffa genes if she gave up six she might be able to produce just to watch is who carried them all they would then be no biological reason to have males told we still don't know what is the point of being a man one theory about what life is not female has to do with mutations have a sex as organism has harmful mutations that would be carried by all her descendants from lesage impressed by another court which is unlikely in time another change would occur in a different gene in the family line of the detail of the genetic message was sitting this one generation succeeds another just like it to take that takes place without the gene borges because it is happening in creatures which have given up sex in the old sexist plants canady beers for a few years before they become so remote that the genetic damage that they no longer throw a fit potatoes conoco to example the irish potato famine happened because the potatoes used nearly all that long to a golden sexist or i. t. which suddenly became susceptible to disease and was distraught at nowadays plants with new sets of genes have tried every few years to stop this happening sex means that new combinations of genes that rise all the time each generation produces successful individuals who've been dealt a favorable handed mutations won office in headed to odessa dante juice mixture and failed to pass the ball short and shaw industries did this in a hackneyed but biologically active phrase banana actress asked if she could face child who might have her body in his brains shaw plucked up the danger of producing an infant who could bring tokyo his body sex reshuffled slice cards he produces beautiful geniuses whose authority the fools who don't have a generation of thousands of new mutations it at some on full some gulps sex as a convenient way of bringing together the best in purging the west is a kind of redemption which can each generation could assist the biological dk which are licensed by mutation is always sex is the key to mortality the fountain at the tender youth knocked the individuals who indulge in it but that the genes they carry nearly every noble they all work of art revolves around the eternal triangle of sex age and death portrait of and are very existence prospects of the same thing over and is in the transmission of genes for mutations humanity is not tied to caves remnant of a noble ancestor problem with the perks of evolution a santos successful mistakes genetics has provided a solution to what about all this questions why people dk that humanity is not in one sense at least a celebration mines in our genes you've been listening to uphold cost from leo akali so the b. b. c. greek like chez them or put a car keys or is it a b. b. c. and dole to corrode tortilla case /slash rutile four 