REITH LECTURES 1991: The Language of the Genes
Steve Jones
Lecture 2: Change or Decay
TRANSMISSION: 20 November 1991 – BBC Radio 4

By the time you’ve finished listening to this talk, you will be a different person. I do
not mean by this that your views about your life, or even about genes, will be
modified - although perhaps they may. What I have in mind is simpler. In the next
half-hour or so your genes, and your life, will be changed by mutation, by errors in
your personal genetic message. Mutation - change - is happening all the time, within
ourselves and over the generations. We are constantly being corrupted by it. All
religions share the idea that humanity is in decline, a decayed remnant of what was
once perfect, and that it must be returned to a higher plane by a process of salvation,
of starting again from scratch.
This lecture is about genetic change, the perpetuation of error, and how progress can
emerge from decay. Mutation is at the heart of human experience. It leads to old age
and death - but also to sex, to rebirth and to evolution. Mutation has within itself the
answer to the universal question of faith, our own decline but humanity’s salvation.
The first life - and the first genes - appeared 3,000 million years ago as short strings of
molecules capable of making rough copies of themselves. At a reckless guess, the
original molecule in life’s first course, the primeval soup, has passed through 3,000
million ancestors before ending up in you or me - or in a chimp or an oak tree.
The message from our ancestors coded in our genes is liable to be garbled during
transmission. When I was a boy I was greatly amused by the tale of the order given
down the line of command to soldiers in the trenches: “Send reinforcements, we’re
going to advance” changed to “Send three and fourpence, we're going to a dance” as it
passed from man to man. This simple tale illustrates mutation and evolution. It shows
“descent with modification”, which was Darwin's own summary of what evolution is
all about.
The ancestral message from the dawn of life has grown to an instruction manual
containing 3,000 million letters coded into DNA. Each of us has a unique edition of
the manual, which differs in millions of ways from that of our fellows. All this
diversity comes from mutation - from accumulated errors in copying the first genetic
message.
Like random changes to a watch, some mutations are harmful. But most have no
effect, and a few may even be useful. There are 5,000 different inborn diseases which
are due to mutation. Some show themselves when there is only one change in the
DNA; some when two identical mutations are passed down, one from each parent;
and some when we inherit a number of changes in different places in the genetic
message. Now that medicine has almost conquered infectious disease, mutations have
become more important. About one child in 30 born in Britain has an inborn error of
1

some kind; and about a third of all hospital admissions of young children involve a
genetic disease. Some of the damaged genes descend from mutations which happened
long ago, but others are mistakes in the sperm or eggs of the parents themselves.
Each of us carries single copies of two or three different mutated genes inherited from
ancestors long-dead which, if two copies of the same one were present, would kill us.
None of us is perfect; everyone has at least one skeleton in their genetical cupboard.
Because there are so many different genes, the chance of seeing a new mutation in
any one of them is small. But there are a few cases where newly arisen mutations can
be spotted. I will concentrate on just one. Before Queen Victoria, the genetic disease
haemophilia - a failure of blood clotting - had never been seen in the Royal Family.
However, several of her descendants have suffered from it. The mutation took place
in one of her parents.
Haemophilia has an unusual pattern of inheritance. It is on the X-chromosome.
Females have two X-chromosomes and males just one. To be a haemophiliac a male
needs to inherit only one copy of the gene, and a female two. The disease is hence
commoner among boys than girls. This was known to the Jews 3,000 years ago. A
mother was allowed not to circumcise her son if his older brother had bled badly at
the operation and, more remarkably, if her sister’s sons had had the same problem.
Several of Queen Victoria’s grandsons were haemophiliacs; she herself said that: “our
poor family seems persecuted by this disease, the worst I know”. The most famous
sufferer was Alexis, the son of Tsar Nicholas of Russia and Queen Alexandra,
Victoria’s granddaughter. One reason for Rasputin’s malign influence on the Russian
court may have been his ability to calm the unfortunate Alexis. The gene has
disappeared from the British Royal Family, although there may still be some
haemophiliacs among the 300 descendants of Queen Victoria alive today.
Somewhat incidentally, there is a claim that another British monarch, George III,
carried a different mutant gene - that causing porphyria, which can lead to mental
illness; the madness of George III. One of the King’s less successful appointments
was his Prime Minister, Lord North, who was responsible for the loss of the American
colonies. It is odd to reflect that both the Russian and the American revolutions and
both Presidents Gorbachev and Bush may result from mutations in Royal DNA.
Until about five years ago, the study of human mutation was largely one of frustration
- slightly ameliorated by anecdotes like these. It has been turned on its head by the
astonishing advances of molecular biology. In the old days, the early 1980s, the only
way to study any human gene was to identify a patient with a mutation and to try to
work out what had gone wrong in the machinery which makes proteins. The nature of
the change in the DNA was quite unknown.
This was true for haemophilia as much as for any other gene. In fact, haemophilia
seemed a rather simple mutation; although different patients had slightly different
symptoms, the mode of inheritance was straightforward and they nearly all seemed to
share the same inherited error. Now, whole sections of DNA from normal and mutant
families can be compared to tell us exactly what has happened and things have got
much more complicated.
To see what mutations can do at the DNA level, we need to understand something
about how human genes are organised. Nobody working 20 years ago would have
predicted the extraordinary structure of the human genome. There are about 3,000
2

million DNA bases of four different kinds - A, G, C and T for short. Only a few
percent of the DNA produces proteins, the substance from which our bodies are made.
What the rest does, we have no idea. Perhaps it is just junk. Although it is dangerous
to dismiss something because we cannot understand it, it is clear that functioning
genes make up only a tiny proportion of our DNA.
We can get an idea of how human DNA is organised and how it can be damaged with
a simple analogy. Imagine the journey along the whole of your own DNA as being
equivalent to one from Land’s End to John o’Groats via London - about 1,000 miles
altogether. To fit in all the DNA letters on this scale, there have to be 50 DNA bases
per inch; or about three million per mile. On the way, we pass through 23 counties of
different sizes; divisions which, conveniently enough, are the same in number as the
23 chromosomes into which our own DNA is packaged. The “Human Genome
Project” hopes to complete the journey by the year 2005, but so far all they have
covered is a distance equivalent to a short walk between Land’s End and the village of
Sennen a couple of miles away. There is a long way to go yet.
The scenery for most of the trip is very tedious. Like much of modern Britain, it
seems to be totally unproductive, and it is littered with the corpses of abandoned
genes, sometimes the same one again and again. About a third of the whole distance is
covered by tens of thousands of repeats of the same short message - often just the two
letters C and A repeated thousands of times. After many miles of dull and repetitive
DNA terrain, we begin to see places where something is being made. There are about
50,000 of these gene factories altogether, many in groups making related products.
Which ones are working depends on the tissue we take the DNA from. In the brain,
more than half of them are producing something. What, we usually don’t know. In
other tissues, far fewer are active. Nearly all the DNA in the cells which give rise to
red blood cells is switched off. However, one small group of genes is tremendously
busy. As a result, they are better known than any other, and much of our
understanding of human molecular biology comes from work on this particular
genetic industrial centre: the beta-globin genes as they are known.
These genes are about half-way along the total length of our DNA - about half-way to
John o’Groats in Leeds, let us say. They make some of the globins, the proteins
involved in carrying oxygen. The globin industrial estate contains about half-a-dozen
genes making closely related products. That for making part of the haemoglobin
molecule is small, about three feet long on our scale. A few feet away is another one,
which makes a globin found only in the embryo. Close to that is the rusting hulk of
some equipment which looks as if it once could produce a protein, but stopped
working years ago. The globin factory covers about 100ft altogether, most of which
seems to be unused space between functional genes. It co-operates with another one, a
long way away - near London on our mythical map - which produces a related
protein. Joined together, the two make haemoglobin, the red-blood pigment.
Blood clotting is genetically even more complex than the transport of oxygen. A
dozen or more different genes scattered all over the genome make a production line to
manufacture the various factors needed. The one which usually goes wrong in
haemophilia is the gene responsible for making Factor VIII. The Factor VIII machine
has an odd structure. On our scale of 50 bases to the inch, this single gene is about
100ft long, far larger than most; but for most of its length does not produce any
3

protein at all. Instead the machinery is divided into dozens of different working
sections, separated by bits of DNA which don’t code for anything. Bizarrely enough,
there even seems to be a gene within a gene, which makes something quite different
in the Factor VIII machinery.
Not surprisingly, the haemophilia mutation - which once seemed to be a simple
genetic change - turns out to be much more complicated. All kinds of mistakes can
happen. Sometimes, just one important letter in the working part of the gene has
changed; usually a different letter in different haemophiliacs. The bits of the
machinery which join the functional pieces of the product together seem to be
particularly susceptible to accidents. In some haemophiliacs part - or even the whole of the Factor VIII region has disappeared.
Most remarkably, it seems that a few patients have suffered from the insertion of an
extra segment of DNA into the machinery, a segment whose own message looks like
one carried by a virus. Another odd thing about haemophilia, which we still do not
fully understand, is that there are many more new mutations in males than in females,
possibly because there are more chances for things to go wrong when the millions of
sperm are produced.
If the rate of mutation to haemophilia is typical, there is about one new mutation in a
functional gene - one which makes a protein in sperm or egg - per five generations in
humans: that is, about 10 million new mutations in working genes per generation in
Britain, which is not a small number. The actual incidence of harmful mutations may
be even higher. Hormonal changes early in pregnancy suggest that eight out of ten
fertilised eggs are spontaneously aborted, usually without the woman knowing
anything about it. Many of these carry lethal mutations.
Just why there are so many mutations, we do not know. There seem to be lots of ways
of increasing the rate. In animals, radiation - such as X-rays - has a dramatic effect. At
the end of the war, the Americans sent a team of scientists - the Atomic Bomb Control
Commission - into Hiroshima and Nagasaki. It tested whether the children of
irradiated survivors of the bombs had any new mutations. The work took 40 years;
and the final report has just appeared. A million genes were looked at. Three
mutations were found in children whose parents were in the cities when the bombs
fell, and three among children of those outside the fallout zone. Although these people
have had more radiation than any other in history, their mutation rate does not seem to
have increased.
Nevertheless, there is enough evidence from other animals to make radiation a real
cause for concern. The biggest avoidable source in Britain is radon gas, which leaks
from granite. Some people living in granite houses in Cornwall may be exposed to
more excess radiation than those working in nuclear power stations.
Chemicals are also important. The number of chromosome mutations in nuclear
power-station workers is slightly greater than that of the general public, but the
number in those working in coal-fired stations is even higher, probably because of the
noxious chemicals which come from burning coal. Some chemicals - like those once
used in hair dyes - have been found to be powerful mutagens, and have been banned.
Many others - such as those in black pepper or in some pesticides - also cause
4

mutations. Some of the most potent are perfectly natural and cynics have argued that
organic foods may be more dangerous than food which has been sprayed because of
the mutagens found in the moulds which grow on them. Even an increase in
temperature can increase the mutation rate, and to cool the nether regions by wearing
the kilt in the granite city of Aberdeen is probably more than enough to reverse any
effects of radon gas.
There is a constant input of mutations as one generation succeeds another. Most have
no effect on those who carry them as they happen in parts of the DNA which do not
contain any meaningful instructions. They take place pretty much at random and
accumulate over the years. Some are lost because, by chance, those who carry them
do not have children; but they are replaced as new mutations come along. This
balance between gain and loss means that the genetic make-up of any lineage changes
with time.
The same thing is at work with language; as words are passed from parents to
children, errors creep in. Sometimes the changes are scarcely noticeable. In
Shakespeare’s As You Like It, the court jester makes a speech which causes great
amusement. Looking at his watch, he says: “Thus we may see how the world wags.
T’is but an hour ago since it was nine. And after one hour more tw’ill be eleven. And
so from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe, and then from hour to hour we rot and rot. And
thereby hangs a tale”. Just why this should be so funny is lost on modern audiences
unless they realise that in Shakespeare’s time the word ‘hour’ sounded almost the
same as the word ‘whore’.
Changes like this are small, but can make a big difference. Languages as distinct as
Bengali and English are related. They owe their existence to the accumulation of tiny
changes to a common ancestor spoken long ago. English and Bengali are not of
course decadent survivors of a noble but extinct language. Mutation has led to
divergence, not to decay.
Take the word used to describe kings and queens. In Sanskrit, this was raj, in Latin
rex, in old Irish ri, in French roi, Spanish rey, and English royal. There have been
different transmission errors in the pathway leading to each language. If such
mistakes build up regularly we can guess at how languages split from each other. If
we know the date of the split we can make a linguistic clock. In Europe, this ticks at a
rate which means that two languages still share about 80 per cent of their words 1,000
years after they split.
The language clock is an imperfect one. Some words scarcely change while others
shift more quickly. Nevertheless, it can be used to trace the origin of modern tongues
even though their ancestral speakers are long dead. We can compare genes in the
same way, to give a “molecular clock”. If we assume that mutations take place
regularly we can draw a tree of relatedness between animals, just as we can between
languages. If we know from fossils when creatures last shared a common ancestor, we
can estimate the rate at which the molecular clock ticks, and work out from this the
date of splitting of other evolving lineages.
The idea of a molecular clock driven by mutation is beautifully simple. As usual, the
more we learn, the more complicated it gets. The clock speeds up and slows down;
5

and ticks at different rates for different genes. An equivalent confusion once led the
Linguistic Society of Paris to ban discussion of the origin of languages. There
certainly have been some spectacular failures by molecular clockmakers to see the
biological wood for the evolutionary trees. However, they have also had some
triumphs. One of these is, by sad accident, bound up with the story of haemophilia.
In haemophilia the Factor VIII gene is not working properly. A few years ago it
became possible to treat haemophiliacs with Factor VIII from donated blood. In
Britain, this was bought from the United States. The American blood-donation system
is a commercial one. Many of those involved are drug addicts who sell their blood,
some of which was contaminated with the Aids virus. In the US, about 15,000
haemophiliacs treated in this way were infected. The number is much smaller in
Britain, but some have already died.
The Aids virus is tiny, with a genetic message of only about 10,000 letters. The first
American cases of Aids began to appear in the late 1970s. The disease was certainly
around before then; the DNA in a pickled specimen from a sailor who died in
Manchester in 1959 shows that his death, then a mystery, was in fact due to Aids.
Since then, millions of people have been infected and millions more are certain to die.
Where did the Aids virus come from, and when did it first begin to attack us?
The answer comes from mutation and the molecular clock. The virus reproduces so
quickly that its evolution can be studied over quite short periods. Its DNA sequence
can even change within a single person during the course of infection. If we use the
DNA from Aids patients in different parts of the world to make a tree of relatedness,
it seems that the ancestral virus came from Africa, and spread via Haiti to the United
States and then to Europe. Because we know when the first infections appeared in
each place, we can set the rate at which the Aids molecular clock ticks. As many as 50
mutations accumulate in each lineage each year.
Comparing the genes of the Aids virus with those of others shows that it is related to
some viruses which infect monkeys without causing too much damage. Its closest
relative attacks the sooty mangabey, a West African monkey. The mutational clock,
based on comparing genes in human Aids viruses with those in the monkey virus,
suggests that the most important agent of Aids split off from its ancestor and invaded
humans in the 19th century. Why, we do not know.
Languages, viruses - and people - change over the generations by accumulating
mutations, but they make this change without degenerating: as far as we can see, life
progresses, it does not decay. But every individual is mortal; as we age, our
machinery decays until it finally breaks down.
Part of this decadence comes from mutation within our own bodies. To make a human
being from a fertilised egg involves making lots of copies of the genetic message,
with plenty of chances for mistakes. Most cells continue to divide - red blood cells are
renewed every four months or so, for example. As a result, each of us accumulates
millions of new mutations in our body cells during our lives. This means that
everyone is an individual evolving system whose identity changes from day to day.
Some of these mutations can lead to disaster. Many cancers result from genetic
accidents, mutations, similar to those which lead to inborn disease. We all have 100 or
so specialised genes which control the growth of cells. When they mutate, cells may
multiply uncontrollably. Just as in haemophilia, all kinds of mistakes can happen. A
6

single DNA base may change, or whole sections of the message be lost. Occasionally,
and amazingly, viruses carry cancer genes similar to those of humans and insert them
into our own DNA.
Age itself may reflect the same process. As our bodies are in a constant fever of DNA
replication, the older we are the more divisions there have been, and the more chances
for mistakes. The cells of a newborn baby are separated by only a few hundred
divisions from the egg, but mine are distanced from it by thousands. My genes have
had more chances to mutate, which is why cancer is largely a disease of old people.
The biological identity crisis which we define as old age and which is solved by death
happens when the genetic message has become so degenerate that the instructions no
longer make sense.
Just like making a series of photocopies, one from the other, a little information is lost
each time a cell divides. Parts of the message disappear with time. Our DNA is
packaged into units called chromosomes. Each has a specialised length of DNA at its
end. This gets shorter with age; in a baby it is about 20,000 letters long, while in a 60year-old it is less than half this. About four letters are dropped from this section of the
message each time a cell divides, so that an old body is working from an imperfect
instruction manual, full of printing errors.
Age may be due to the accumulation of genetic accidents. Human cells in culture age
more quickly when they carry a defect which increases the mutation rate; and some
children who inherit a tendency towards cancer also grow old more rapidly. It seems
that the decay of our ageing selves is due to mutation.
Age also increases the number of mutations in sperm and egg. It is more than an
accident that Victoria’s father, Leopold, Duke of Albany - within whose august
testicles the haemophilia mutation probably took place - was more than 50 when she
was born. The effects of age can be striking. The chromosome mutation which gives
rise to Down’s syndrome is 30 times commoner among mothers older than 45
compared to those under 21.
All this adds a certain irony to the claims of one institution devoted to reversing the
decay of the human race: The Centre For Germinal Choice in California, in which
Nobel Prize winners make genetic deposits for hopeful mothers. The depositors may
once have approached genetic perfection, but because they’re elderly that perfection
has been marred by age.
Why, if our genes change and decay through our lives, does the human race not
degenerate as one generation succeeds another? The answer lies, it seems, in sex. To
define sex is simple; it is a way of enabling genes from different ancestors to be
brought together in the same person. There are plenty of creatures which have given it
up. Take the humble potato, for example. Every potato of a particular variety - let us
say the King Edward to preserve our royal theme - is identical to every other, and
each one of them has the same set of genes as the hoary ancestor of all potatoes
bearing that name. This is very convenient for the farmer and the grocer, which is
why sex is not encouraged among potatoes. King Edward himself was a very different
kettle of fish: half his genes came from his mother, and half from his father, and he
was a new and unique genetic mixture who combined some of the qualities of the
7

two; and of an ever widening pool of more distant ancestors.
That is what sex is, but why is it there? There is certainly a lot of it about. Very few
animals have given up sex: the odd lizard or fish, but none of our close relatives. Even
creatures like greenfly, which manage without it for most of the time, feel the need for
a bout of sex once a year or so. The frank answer is that we do not really know what
sex is for. It must be important, as it is so expensive. It means that a female must
waste her time producing sons, who carry only half her genes. If she gave up sex she
might be able to produce just daughters who carry them all. There would then be no
biological reason to have males at all; we still do not know what is the point of being
a man.
One theory about why life is not female has to do with mutation. If a sexless organism
has a harmful mutation, it will be carried by all her descendants unless it is reversed
by another one - which is unlikely. In time, another change will occur in a different
gene in the family line; and a decay of the genetic message will set in as one
generation succeeds another, just like the decay that takes place within our ageing
bodies.
We can see this happening in creatures which have given up sex. Nearly all sexless
plants can only be used for a few years before they become so loaded with genetic
damage that they no longer thrive. Potatoes are a good example. The Irish potato
famine happened because the potatoes used nearly all belonged to an old and sexless
variety, which suddenly became susceptible to disease and was destroyed. Nowadays,
plants with new sets of genes are tried every few years to stop this happening.
Sex means that new combinations of genes arise all the time. Each generation
produces successful individuals who have been dealt a favourable hand of mutations,
while others inherit a less advantageous mixture and fail to pass them on. George
Bernard Shaw illustrated this in a hackneyed, but biologically accurate phrase. When
an actress asked if she could bear his child, who might have her body and his brains,
Shaw pointed out the danger of producing an infant with her brains and his body. Sex
reshuffles life’s cards: it produces beautiful geniuses who survive, and ugly fools who
do not.
Every generation thousands of new mutations appear. Some are harmful, some not.
Sex is a convenient way of bringing together the best, and purging the worst. It is a
kind of redemption, which, in each generation, reverses the biological decay which
arises by mutation. In some ways, sex is the key to immortality, the fountain of eternal
youth - not for the individuals who indulge in it, but for the genes they carry.
Nearly every novel, play, or work of art revolves around the eternal triangle of sex,
age and death. All three of them and our very existence are aspects of the same thing:
of errors in the transmission of genes, of mutation. Humanity is not a decayed
remnant of a noble ancestor. Rather we are the products of evolution, a set of
successful mistakes. Genetics has provided the solution to one of our oldest questions:
why people decay but humanity does not. In one sense, at least, our salvation lies in
our genes.

8

