REITH LECTURES 1994: Managing Monsters
Marina Warner
Lecture 4: Beautiful Beasts: The Call of the Wild
TRANSMISSION: 16 February 1994 – BBC Radio 4

In the medieval romance Valentine and Orson, the Empress of Constantinople finds
herself alone in a wild forest giving birth to twins. Her husband, the Emperor, has
cruelly cast her out under false suspicion of adultery. A passing she-bear steals one of
the children for herself. The other baby, Valentine, is rescued with his mother when a
nobleman comes riding by at the right moment and takes them both home with him.
This twin, Valentine, grows up at court to become a valiant prince, whilst the lost boy,
Orson (or bear cub) grows up a wild, hairy man doing great mischief to all that pass
through the forest. The separated twins’ tumultuous legend tells how the brothers later
meet, and fight, and how Valentine captures the wild man Orson:
“At the first dawn of morning, Valentine arose; and, putting on his
armour, took a shield, polished like a mirror, and having arrived at the
forest he climbed a high tree near the bear’s cave. Presently he heard
Orson, who had a buck with him which he had just killed, come roaring
by; and he could not help admiring the beauty of his make and his agility,
wishing it were possible to tame him. He then tore off a branch of a tree
and threw it at Orson who, looking up, uttered a furious howl and darted
up the tree like lightning. Valentine descended and Orson, seeing him on
the ground, rushed down. Valentine held up his shield and Orson,
evidently surprised and delighted, beheld his own image.”
Just as Perseus used Medusa’s mask to free Andromeda from the monster, so
Valentine spellbinds the wild man. The scene of Orson’s capture borrows the advice
of medieval bestiaries on hunting a tigress. To catch that wildest of wild beasts, a
hunter should throw down a glass globe in the animal’s path. She will see herself
reflected in it in miniature and mistake her image for her cub. This will stop her in her
tracks and she will try to pick it up, giving the huntsman time to drop a net over her.
The romance Valentine and Orson was translated from a lost French original and
printed by Caxton’s successor Wynken de Worde at the beginning of the 16th century.
It was reprinted many times in different adaptations, including a dynamic full-colour
version by the pioneering Victorian children’s illustrator Walter Crane. But it seems
to be almost forgotten today, even though the story of the twin brothers - one wild,
one tame - gives precious clues to historical attitudes to nature, and reveals the
changing relationship between human and animal.
In Valentine and Orson, the bear-child becomes civilised, attains rationality and
humanity at the hands of his human brother. The story does not allow Orson to remain
savage, does not leave him to his fear of influence. He enters his brother’s culture, and
this is quickly marked by an improvement in table manners. When first brought to
court on a leash like a beast, he “tore the files asunder with his claws and devoured
them like a ravenous wolf. And then, thrusting his head into a cistern of water, he
1

drank as much as might have sufficed a horse”. But Valentine soon teaches him the
use of a glass and a fork. He receives baptism, but his wild nature persists. His pelt
stands in for clothes, he is shaggy, unkempt, and roars incoherently at the top of his
voice. The pair, now sworn companions, sally forth on more adventures and yet more
against the infidel. At Valentine’s side, Orson then overcomes giants and even
conquers the Green Knight himself. Though he retains the character of a brute and his
wild skins and his incoherent speech, these also signify natural innocence like the
camel hide of John the Baptist in the desert or the penitential veil of hair worn by
Mary Magdalene. They signal too the corresponding rejection of artifice, of
civilisation, of worldly vanities; in short of human culture as the carrier of an intrinsic
sinfulness.
The twin boys, Valentine and Orson, stand for polarised goals. An 1822 edition for
children put it straightforwardly: ‘In Valentine, we contemplate a man endowed with
the education of art, whilst the person and character of Orson discover the simple
workings of nature’.
A length of rope made of steel wire at one end can be interwoven with jute fibre until
the other end of the rope is altogether different, and yet it will still be the same rope
unbroken from end to end. Within today’s myths of human nature, the warrior and the
wild creature, the child and the beast do not stand at opposite poles but are
intertwined, continuous, inseparable. Yet they are also in polar opposition to one
another too. In the arguments about the difference between humans and animals, there
has been a pronounced change of sympathy growing ever more strongly since the
18th century, and it is the wild pole that has been radiating the greater magnetic
attraction on human imagination and allegiance.
Few Elizabethans would have considered themselves kin to a crocodile, or thought of
adopting an endangered species to prevent its extinction. In Elizabeth I’s time, a
courtier, bespattered with the blood foaming from the lips of a bear at a bear-baiting
session, rejoiced in the sport; the early French rationalist Descartes arrived at the firm
analysis that an animal was merely a machine: natural, but lacking a soul.
As we all know, our evolutionary proximity to the apes caused horror in the last
century. Adam had been lord of creation in the Bible, and named the beasts; now he
was merely one of their kind. The peacock no longer existed simply to delight his
eyes, or the pig to fill his belly.
Of course cruelty to animals continues, and identification with them is sporadic and
inconsistent. But zoos, where people thrilled to see wild creatures in the last century,
are now closing down, or turning into show farms with domestic animals only; a
protestor has died at a hunt meeting in an accident with the van bringing in the
hounds; a father has placed his son on the race track of the Grand National to prevent
cruelty to the horses; campaigns to save whales, seals, dolphins, spiders - and
crocodiles - attract enormous followings, and have had some real effect on hunting
and trading practices.
The desire for closeness to animal power may still stimulate the breeding of fighting
dogs, but it also drives the rise in the variety of soft toys - not only the teddy bear, but
many kinds of reptiles and scary animals too. Even dinosaurs are now transformed by
2

plush and stuffing into reassuring, cuddly, domestic gods, nursery talismans.
The symbolic value of wild animals has ancient, tough mythological roots. Even when
despised in an anthropocentric world, wild things have offered a standard by which
human identity and exploits could be measured: their proximity often proves a
legendary hero’s strength. The Greek “Alexander romance”, extant since the third
century AD, is a hugely entertaining farrago of history, tall stories and esoteric
wisdom. It exalts its hero, the mythic Alexander the Great, by staging a sequence of
confrontations with monsters of the wilds.
The picaresque narrative follows Alexander to the borders of the known world and
beyond, from where he writes letters home to his mother:
“We set out and came to a green country where . . . we saw a huge man
with hair all over his body, and we were frightened. I gave orders to
capture him. When he was taken he gazed at us ferociously. I ordered a
naked woman to be brought to him; but he grabbed her and ate her. The
soldiers rushed up to rescue her, but he made a gnashing noise with his
teeth. The rest of the natives heard him, and came running towards us out
of a swamp: there were about 10,000 of them . . . I ordered the swamp to
be set alight; and when they saw the fire they fled . . . They had no
human intelligence, but barked like dogs.”
Alexander routs the wild men with fire, sign of the hearth and culture, in the same
way as Valentine used another symbol of consciousness - the mirror - to prevail over
his wild brother.
More familiar heroes who had to contend with - and master - the wild include
Hercules, father to many a superman. He overcame the Nemean lion and plenty of
other wild creatures. Centuries on and rather closer to home, in Maurice Sendak’s
exhilarating children’s story, Max puts on his wolf suit, visits the land Where the
Wild Things Are, joins in the wild rumpus and becomes their king - before he comes
back home to his supper and finds it still hot.
Sometimes the distinction between taming the beasts and becoming one of them is
blurred, as in the case of Max. Many a classical deity or warrior has been raised by an
animal in the wilds. Zeus was suckled by Amaltheia, a nymph in the form of a shegoat, and fed with wild honey from combs found in the hollow of a tree, as can be
seen in a wonderfully vigorous painting in the Dulwich Collection. Poussin’s
sometimes frozen poetry appears here to be itself molten with sap and sweetness. The
healer god Aesculapius was also abandoned, and nursed by a she-goat, too, and
guarded by a sheepdog; the legendary founders of Rome, Romulus and Remus, were
rescued by a she-wolf after being exposed on a mountainside; such legends survive in
heraldry, and some families claim descent from the union of an ancestor with a wild
thing - like the Lusignan, who traced their line back to Melusine, a scaly and batwinged siren, and the Orsini, whose ancestor, as their name suggests, was reared by a
bear.
The animal mother breaks the link with human parents, she helps to distinguish her
charge from ordinary children, she confers on him a mark of special difference from
3

the human. The she-goat or bear or wolf nourishes the man of destiny with her vitality
- presented, in such stories, as somehow more vital than a human mother’s milk, as
intrinsically natural with a capital N. The Epic of Gilgamesh, written in Sumer around
5,000 years ago, foreshadows the twins Valentine and Orson when it confronts the
urban warlord Gilgamesh, King of Uruk, with the wild forest dweller Enkidu. Enkidu
has been made by the goddess from clay dropped in the wilderness:
“His body was rough. He had long hair like a woman’s and was covered
with matted hair like Samuqan’s, the god of cattle. Enkidu ate grass in
the hills with the gazelle and jostled with wild beasts at the waterholes.
He had joy of the water with the herds of wild game.”
Gilgamesh captures him, using a harlot as bait. The seductions of the woman subdue
the wild man and he is led docile into the city. At first Gilgamesh and Enkidu fight,
but then they recognise that they’re a true match for each other. This is literally meant
with the full force of the word “match”. Different in appearance, origin, conduct, they
feel a twin-ship and become boon companions, beloved friends, the first buddies in
literature. Until Enkidu is killed and ascends into the underworld where Gilgamesh
follows him, but cannot pull him back to life. In this ancient poem, the hero takes the
wild man to himself, binds him in love to his life, but inevitably fails to incorporate
him totally. If he managed, the wild man would no longer be what he is. Gilgamesh
finds himself condemned to lament this impossibility and his loss for as long as he
lives. This loss haunts the poem in which he appears, and the same loss continues to
haunt philosophy, storytelling, myth-making, and ideas about maleness - never
perhaps more so than today. The threat of entropy in nature, bought about by human
achievements - by the car, the aerosol, the nuclear reactor, pesticides, genetic
interference - has never been so serious, nor perhaps, even in times of millennial
fever, so acutely felt. Nature, newly understood to be somehow uncontaminated,
innocent, nurturing and spontaneous beckons as a remedy to the distortions and
excesses of progress.
In South Queensferry near Edinburgh at the annual August Fair, a figure called the
Burry Man walks through the town bearing great sceptres of harvest fruits and foliage
in both hands, completely parcelled up in 42 mats made of burdock burrs and brown
paper until only his eyes peep out of a prickly mask. He looks like a knobbly
hedgehog. Paraded in silence all day, seven miles through the town, he is thought to
assure fruitfulness for the year; in this predominantly fishing community to fill the
nets. Though the custom is presented as hallowed by great and mysterious antiquity,
the earliest record of his procession dates from 1746. The word “folklore” itself was
only coined 100 years later and, like many folk practices with pagan undertones, the
Burry Man has become more and more entrenched in the last 20 years - ironically,
just as the burdock weed itself becomes more and more scarce.
When advertisers feature a bear, a mountain lion, an ibex or other wild thing to
endorse the life-giving properties of a car, alcohol, mineral water or shampoo, they
are also communicating an idea of heroic and untrammelled independence, free
spirits. Social animals hardly have selling power. They are mostly insects or rodents
or uneasy birds like rooks and not endangered. The lone hero, the pattern of modern
man finds an image of himself under threat of extinction in the large mammals - the
gorilla, the grizzly and the lynx.
4

Some useful earlier distinctions have been blurred by this nostalgic desire for the
power and freedom of the wild. Metamorphosis out of human shape into another,
beastly form, used to express a fall from human grace. The first metamorphosis in
Ovid’s great book picks up on a familiar modern myth that even Plato mentioned, in
The Republic. Lycaon, ruler of Arcadia, kills and cooks a hostage. For this lack of
hospitality, Zeus turns him into the first werewolf. Calisto is changed into a little bear
by Hera in revenge for the love Zeus feels for her; Circe mockingly degrades
Odysseus’s men when she changes them into swine.
In the parallel, predominantly Christian tradition, such animal mutations were the
work of the Devil. Indeed, as fairy-tales often evolve out of religious stories, the
defeat of an ogre like Bluebeard recapitulates many comforting Christian tales about
women who unwittingly marry the Devil but with the help of the Virgin Mary free
themselves in the end from his binding charms. Even Bluebeard’s name contains a
memory of those “shagge-hair’d blue devils” of the Bible, represented in stained-glass
windows and on the mystery play stage, where they would caper with firecrackers
gripped between their teeth.
The forms which the Devil adopted also coincidentally reproduced actual threats to
people and livestock in times of famine, when wolves and even bears entered the
villages from their lairs in the wild. Tales about such predators did not need to grow
in the telling: there is a ring of genuine terror in the report of the Dutch mariners who,
in 1597, were looking for a northern passage to China, and found the pack ice closing
in and the phantom shapes of polar bears hovering, waiting to pounce on the dying
crew.
It is blithely symptomatic of contemporary forgettings that we now find bears sweet.
The return to human form used to be the quest, the reward, the reason of the fairy-tale
in the first place. But beastly shape is now becoming an appealing alternative, even a
prize, a more valuable rather than a degraded state. Listen to the scene-setting of a
recent video game called Altered Beast:
“It is the time of gods and myths and legends. When men were warriors
and courageously fought unnatural enemies in the endless battle of good
against evil. It is the time of the Altered Beast . . . Although you were
once a brave and awesome Roman Centurion, the rigours of this journey
demand a supernatural display of strength. So you are bestowed with the
powers of the Altered Beast. The power to transform your being into a
part animal, part human creature of formidable force.”
As you advance through the levels and perils of the game, you - former soldier mutate into various animals, all of them capable of great mischief like Enkidu, like
Orson: first a Werewolf, next a Were dragon, a Were bear, and at last, a Gold
Werewolf, in which guise you can defeat the ogre and rescue Athena - wisdom whom he has been holding captive.
This load of old cobblers is very interesting because the game’s metamorphoses are
running counter to the traditional current of Western myth and folklore, in which the
human absorbs the animal, by taming it and mastering it. Even more fundamentally, it
contradicts the underlying value of the Gilgamesh-Enkidu, Valentine-Orson pairings
5

that the human hero remains superior, however deep his reliance on his beast ally,
however urgent his attachment. The new myth of the wild calls into question the
privilege of being a human at all.
This new assignation of higher value to wild creatures gains force when there is a
woman in the picture. In The Epic of Gilgamesh, as we saw, the harlot is sent out
from the city to trap Enkidu and succeeds in gentling him with her charms. The
energy of the wild figure and myth when it meets a woman transmutes into desire
which can prove the undoing of the wild elements in his nature. This in turn can make
or break him. The change of attitude over time to this encounter can be seen very
clearly in the different ways the ancient fairy-tale of “Beauty and the Beast” has been
told.
Until rather recently, the Beast suffered from his disfigurement; sometimes it
expressed just punishment for earlier bad behaviour. Under the evil spell, the Beast
fears that nobody will ever love him in this form and he will never be freed. Even as
late as the Cocteau film of 1946, for instance, the Beast feels himself doomed in his
beastliness. Against his will, he hunts wild creatures and tears them limb from limb to
devour them raw; his great claws and mane smoulder after a kill. He can only speak
monosyllabically to la Belle, and his brutishness repels her. But la Belle will release
him, eventually, from this confining, animal realm through those human qualities of
mercy and love.
Enchanting as the film is, and fascinating as the Beast’s charms are, Cocteau’s film
was already quaint in its symbolist allegiance to the redemptive powers of civility - of
art and beauty and romance.
Many earlier, popular versions of the story show, by contrast, a marked preference for
the beast. And the most familiar and revealing example is King Kong, the monster
movie of all time, which was made in 1933 and has proved, alongside The Wizard of
Oz, one of Hollywood’s highest earners. King Kong gives a new spin to the old tale
when it opens with the lugubrious prophecy: “And lo, the beast looked upon the face
of beauty. And it stayed its hand from killing. And from that day, it was as one dead.”
The plot unfolds how an intrepid adventurer, Carl Denham, has heard about a
prodigious mystery, the “Eighth Wonder of the World”. Everything about Kong
places him in direct succession to the monstrous wild men of myth and legend. Homo
sylvestris was the name of the missing link between the brute and the human, and was
imagined by some early palaeontologists as a species of upright orangutan, a great
ape. Kong’s jungle kingdom, sealed behind a fortified wall and massive gates, exists
beyond the borders of the known world on an island recorded only by one sea captain
who is now dead. The island, once it comes into view, all precipitous cliffs and
hulking doomy crags, was significantly modelled on Gustav Dore’s engravings for
Paradise Lost. And it is pertinent that Dore’s bible had also inspired early
reconstructions of primitive man. Again, as in The Epic of Gilgamesh, a woman has
been used as bait - a blonde, the actress Fay Wray, who after her performance in this
film became the first of the adored screamers of Hollywood.
The film begins by firmly establishing a primordial savage King of the Jungle, the
Beast Kong. But after Fay Wray’s abduction, the film begins to sway sympathies in
another direction. Fear and loathing gradually change to identification; sexuality
6

moves to the centre of the story, and the great ape becomes a figure of a man - a
desiring, aspiring, frustrated, tragic male. When Kong does not eat Fay Wray or
violate her, but carries her off to a rocky height, anticipating the last sequence on an
urban pinnacle, he examines her and the audience is caught up in his wonder at her
flimsy delicacy in his great paw. The scene was censored in 1938 for its sexual
intimacy. It shows Kong picking off a filmy sliver of skirt and then sniffing his
fingers with twitching nostrils as the music turns soft and tender. Later when Kong is
put on show in New York, cruciform on gallows as if at a slave auction, he becomes
an emblem of civilisation’s savagery. His animal wildness shows up the limits of
human culture. When he thinks the exploding flashbulbs of the cameras are going to
harm Fay Wray, he breaks his shackles. His freedom rampage through the city in
pursuit of the blonde then begins.
King Kong turns into an ironical critique of human society, of its cruelty and greed
and love of show. The sympathy it displays towards the beast rather than the beauty
grows stronger throughout, however illogically, until the climactic end. When Carl
Denham first captured Kong, stunning him with gas bombs, he ordered him to be tied
up and cried out, “We’ll give him more than chains . . . We’ll teach him Fear.” The
chains, the fear, mark the end of his wild days; repression, domestication. At one
level, the monster represents nature versus humanity; at another, he dramatises a
worse danger for men: women. The crushing of Kong becomes just another episode in
the long tragic chronicle about male libidos unjustly slapped down. Fay Wray’s
rejection of him inaugurates a rich tradition in popular culture of sympathetic
monsters spurned. Such plots neatly manage a stack of pleasures: they flatter women
with evidence of their remarkable powers to excite and tame the primitive; they
excuse men their deep down wild impulses; and they explain their failure to gratify
them.
At the same time, the story upholds the terror of predatory male power because that
justifies the need for chivalrous vengeance and continual control of women: King
Kong is a rescue romance and there is nothing else for Fay Wray to do but scream like
a terrified child.
But even while she screams, she never quite quells the idea that all beauties deep
down really want a beast: that Kong might be the monster of her dreams. Beastliness
means sexiness, or so many a modern hero would like to think.
MUSICAL CLIP: BEAUTY AND THE BEAST
This Gaston, God’s gift to women, singing songs in praise of himself, is one of two
Beasts in the recent Disney cartoon of Beauty and the Beast. Both are suitors for
Belle’s love and it is the one in human shape who loses out: the hunky beefcake, a
Sylvester Stallone lookalike, falls to a horrible and well deserved death off a precipice
at the Beast’s castle. But as for Belle’s lover in animal form - half minotaur, half lion
- Belle attends to his personal growth. He learns to weep, not roar, and wins her
through his cultural attributes - especially his amazingly well stocked library. Unlike
Gaston, he does not go hunting and shooting; he is aware of his shortcomings, and
grieves like a good existentialist at his condition. The film promises its audience
Prince Charming will turn out a New Man, virile yet tender, natural yet cultivated, in
touch with his emotions, childlike in the best sense, yet mature and responsible in his
7

attitude. All he needed was the love of a good woman.
This is a woman’s film: the script is by Linda Wolverton and it shows throughout that
it has in mind an audience of mums and daughters. It is an ingenious attempt to
negotiate the extremely tricky ground of women’s attraction to male appetite. But the
animators invest the Beast with such allure that they cannot find a way to bring him
back to humankind without bathos. After the Beast, Prince Charming can only be a
comedown.
Angela Carter wrote several dazzling variations of the “Beauty and the Beast” tale in
her collection The Bloody Chamber and challenged the tradition of taming or
civilising or otherwise containing the Beast. In “The Tiger’s Bride”, she turns the
traditional ending upside down, and it is Beauty who metamorphoses, shedding her
human shape in the last lines of the story:
“He dragged himself closer and closer to me, until I felt the harsh velvet
of his head against my hand, then a tongue, abrasive as sandpaper. He
will lick the skin off me!
And each stroke of his tongue ripped off skin after successive skin, all
the skins of a life in the world, and left behind a nascent patina of shining
hairs. My ear-rings turned back to water and trickled down my shoulders;
I shrugged the drops off my beautiful fur.”
It is too easy to dismiss visions of the Beast’s newfound nobility as male self-flattery,
or even, more seriously, as sentimental justifications of toughness, brute strength,
independence - the same stuff of the warrior. The beast, the wild man Enkidu and the
bear-child Orson issue exciting invitations to a journey, to pleasure. Their domain
cannot be the exclusive property of one sex.
In modern myth, it is not that the boundary has been eroded between human and
animal - rather, the value given to each side in the contrast has changed. And
contemporary stories are finding a way to answer the call of the wild.

8

