REITH LECTURES 1994: Managing Monsters
Marina Warner
Lecture 3: Little Angels, Little Devils: Keeping Children Innocent
TRANSMISSION: 9 February 1994 – BBC Radio 4

In 1828, a young man was found in the market square of Nuremberg. He could write
his name, Kaspar Hauser, but he could not speak, except for a single sentence: “I want
to be a rider like my father.” He had been kept all his life in a cellar, alone in the dark
until his unexplained release that day. Although he was in his teens when he suddenly
appeared, he seemed a symbolic child, a stranger to society, a tabula rasa in whom
ignorance and innocence perfectly coincided. In his wild state, Kaspar Hauser offered
his new minders and teachers a blueprint of human nature - untouched. And in his
case, his character fulfilled the most idealised image of original innocence.
He was sick when given meat to eat, passed out when given beer, and showed so little
aggression and cruelty that he picked off his fleas without crushing them to set them
free. His story attracted myth-making in his own time, and has continued to inspire
writers and film-makers. The most recent work, a book-length narrative poem by the
English poet David Constantine, opens with the apparition of Kaspar Hauser out of
nowhere.
He stood there swaying on his sticky feet
His head was bowed, the light had hurt his eyes
The pigeons ran between his feet like toys and he was mithered by the
scissoring swifts
Even an embryo raises its little paws against the din
But Kaspar stood there, sucking it all in
There he remained until the windows folded their wooden lids back in
rows
From all the openings of their ordinary lives, the people stared
They inched, already aghast, at all the questions he would make them
ask.
Kaspar Hauser was an enigma, and after his mysterious return to the world his life
never did become free from strange, turbulent incident: he was suspected of
fabrication, he was assaulted and wounded by an unknown assailant, and later was
thought to be the usurped heir to the throne of Baden. His innate, gentle goodness
could not save him: he was attacked, seduced, betrayed, and abandoned by his wouldbe adoptive father, the Englishman Lord Stanhope. And finally he was murdered, in
still unsolved circumstances, in 1833.
There had been other wild children who had inspired scientific experiments into
human development, but Kaspar Hauser more than any other foreshadows this
century’s struggle with the question of the child’s natural character. And his fate still
offers a timely parable about the nostalgic worship of childhood innocence, which is
more marked today than it has ever been: the difference of the child from the adult has
1

become a dominant theme in contemporary mythology.
In literature this has produced two remarkable dream figures living in voluntary exile
from grown-up society - Kipling’s unforgettably vivid Mowgli and J M Barrie’s
cocky hero, the boy who wouldn’t grow up, Peter Pan. Both reveal the depth of adult
investment in a utopian childhood state, and this can lead to disillusion, often punitive
and callous, with the young as people. The belief that there is a proper childlike way
for children to be has deep roots. In his novel about Kaspar Hauser, written in 1908,
the German writer Jakob Wassermann put his finger on the dreams the boy stirred:
“This creature reeling helplessly in an alien world, his gaze cumbered
with sleep, his gestures curbed by fear, his noble brow enthroned above a
somewhat wasted face. The peace and purity of heart that appear in that
brow, to my mind they are incontestable signs. If my suspicions prove
correct, if I can lay bare the roots of this life and make its branches
blossom, I shall hold up a mirror of immaculate humanity to our dull,
insensitive world, and people will see that there are valid proofs of the
existence of the soul which the idolaters of our times deny with so
squalid a vehemence.”
In this ringing declaration we catch the full expression of a belief which still has
purchase today: that the child and the soul are somehow interchangeable and that,
consequently, children are the keepers and guarantors of humanity’s reputation. This
has inspired a wonderfully rich culture of childhood, one of the most remarkable
phenomena of modern society, from an unsurpassed imaginative literature for
children today to profound psychoanalytical speculations on the thinking processes
and even language of the foetus. But it also has social consequences for children
themselves that are not all benign.
Childhood, placed at a tangent to adulthood, perceived as special and magical,
precious and dangerous at once, has turned into some volatile stuff - hydrogen, or
mercury, which has to be contained. The separate condition of the child has never
been so bounded by thinking, so established in law as it is today. This mythology is
not fallacious or merely repressive. Myths are not only delusions - chimeras - but also
tell stories which can give shape and substance to practical, social measures. How we
treat children really tests who we are, fundamentally conveys who we hope to be.
The separate sphere of childhood has grown - as a social concept, as a market
Possibility, as an area of research, as a Problem: children are no longer chattels,
anymore than women, and new legal measures like the Children’s Act give them
voice and choices in decision making about their legal situation. Incest, molestation
and even rape in families have always taken place, but never have more attempts been
made - often with appalling clumsiness - to save children from their perpetrators.
Fiction and reportage also focus on the child as so radically different that he or she
stands in an oblique relation to human society, not entirely part of it, not yet
incorporated into history. Charities, in hard-pressed competition for funds, resort to
more and more explicit images of maimed, starving, diseased, orphaned and doomed
infants and children in order to raise money for schemes which are frequently
intended to help everyone, like cancer research or water suppliers.
2

The injured child has become today’s icon of humanity. It is no accident that the
Victorian melodrama Les Miserables inspired one of the contemporary theatre’s
greatest successes, that the saucer-eyed, starveling waif staring from the posters drew
thousands to the musical. The phantom face of James Bulger has become the most
haunting image of present horrors and social failure - his innocence an appeal and an
accusation.
Some historians, like Philippe Aries, have suggested (rather influentially) that the
comparative offhandedness towards children in the past denotes indifference, and that
the kind of love we expect and know today is a comparatively modern phenomenon, a
bourgeois luxury. Certainly hardly any examples of children’s own writings or
paintings survive, and few records of their behaviour have come down, until parents in 17th century Holland, for instance - began keeping diaries. But this does not
necessarily mean parents didn’t care. The testimony of graves yields another story.
From Roman epitaphs to memorials in Westminster Abbey, the accents of grief sound
across the centuries. On a tomb in the Etruscan necropolis of Cerveteri, near Rome, a
father had these verses written for his daughter, Asiatica:
“Here lies the lifeless body of my beloved little girl, who has been
plunged into a bitter death by the Fates - her unlucky life had lasted less
than 10 years. Cruel fates, who have saddened my old age! For I shall
always seek, little Asiatica, to see your face again, shaping its features in
my mind to find some consolation. My only solace will be to see you
again, as soon as possible, when, my life over, our two shades will be
united.”
Not only tombs, but stories too convey the intense attachment felt for children: in
tragedy the murders of offspring provide the believable motive for the most terrible
revenges: Clytemnestra never forgets that Agamemnon allowed her daughter
Iphigenia to be sacrificed to get a fair wind for Troy. For this, in Euripides’ play, she
makes the first literal bloodbath of him.
It seems to me children have always been cherished. But the present cult of the child
loves them for a new and different reason. It insists on children’s intimate connection
to a wonderful, free-floating world of the imagination. Their observable active fantasy
life, their fluid make-believe play seem to give them access to a world of wisdom, and
this in turn brings them close to myth and fairy-tale. These ideas were grown in the
ground of Romanticism: Wordsworth’s line, “heaven lies about us in our infancy”,
reflects, for instance, the idealism of German metaphysics at the time.
The Romantic thirst to recover childlikeness had a huge influence on the growth of
interest in children and the activities of their minds. Anthologies with titles like Myths
of the Greeks and Romans; Tanglewood Tales; Tales of the Norse Gods and Heroes,
all treating myth and legend, began to be produced as children’s literature in the last
century. The childhood of the species - the era of myth and legend - seemed
appropriate for the young. And the heroes of wonder narratives of all kinds gradually
became younger, to invite the young listener or reader’s identification.
This change had certain serious consequences. The tale of Cupid and Psyche for
3

instance, which later inspired Beauty and the Beast, first appears in the second
century ribald metaphysical novel by Apuleius, The Golden Ass: there, it is an adult
romance, and Cupid and Psyche have been lovers for some time when Psyche breaks
the spell by looking at Cupid in bed with her. The Neoplatonists in the Renaissance
allegorised the tale as the spiritual quest of the Soul for love - still no hint of child
protagonists or a child audience. But by the 18th century, the romance itself is
transformed into the fairy-tale Beauty and the Beast and, filtered through the eyes of a
well-meaning governess, it turns into a moral lesson in love, directed at her young
charges to prepare them for tricky moments lying ahead: Beauty is certainly not going
to bed with the Beast, but deciding whether or not they should get engaged.
At the beginning of the 19th century, the Grimm brothers began gathering material for
their famous collection of German fairy-tales. They relied on a heterogeneous group
of sources - members of their own family, servants, a tailor’s wife, several landed
aristocratic friends - all of them adults who had continued to pass on the stories in
mixed company of men and women, old and young. The Grimms’ full title,
Children’s and Household Tales, retained the hint of a universal audience, but there is
no doubt that their pioneering work nourished the concept that such tales belong in a
special way to children. However, the brothers quickly realised that if the tales were
to become children’s fare, their previous adult entertainment value - their sadism,
eroticism, cruelty, and immoral distribution of just and unjust desserts - had to be
either censored or explained. This led to clipping and tucking and letting in here and
letting out there. On the whole, sex was out and violence was in, and lots of it,
especially in the form of gleeful retributive justice. The wicked stepmother in “Snow
White” could dance to death in her red-hot shoes, but the Sleeping Beauty - who still
comatose had borne twins to the prince in earlier versions - could only be kissed.
The difficulty is that by angling such material at children in particular, the pleasure
they took in it marked out bloodthirstiness, fearlessness and even callousness as
childish, rather than universally human. By making children the heroes and heroines
of such stories, the erotic discoveries and ordeals many of them describe had to be
disinfected, leaving them latent in violent symbols and gory plots. By placing
eroticism itself off limits to children, a young child’s active curiosity about sex then
became wicked. Children could inspire desire, but mustn’t express it - again like
women in the 19th century.
In the postwar period, psychoanalytic thinkers, like Bruno Bettelheim in his
influential study The Uses of Enchantment, deepened the association of fairy-tale with
children, and of cruel fantasy with the childish imagination. Bettelheim affirmed the
therapeutic value of struggle and horror for the growing child, arguing that as a small,
vulnerable creature suffering from adults’ tyranny, it was very helpful to read about
other small, vulnerable creatures, like Cinderella, or Tom Thumb, who survive - or
better still, win through - against all adversity. From this perspective, nothing in
fantasy was perceived as too foul or too violent. Brightly coloured picture books of
“Cinderella”, for instance, now include the bloody chopping of one sister’s toes and
the lopping of the other’s heel, and climax with the final putting out of the ugly
sisters’ eyes.
The theory that children need to compensate for their own hapless dependence by
imagining themselves huge and powerful and cruel has also normalised all manner of
4

frightening play-acting, equating children with monsters, childhood with a savage
state. Stephen Jay Gould, the biologist, has pointed out that kids do not have an innate
kinship with dinosaurs, but that it has been fostered by intensive marketing; the
relationship seems based in some idea of shared primitiveness - and future extinction.
Lots of toys appeal to the idea of children’s innate savagery - from huge, furry,
clawed slippers for tiny tots to wear to bed to warn off any other beats in the night, to
dinosaur lunchboxes and watches. As a gift catalogue describes, ‘at the touch of a
button, the fearsome Tyrannosaurus Rex emits a bloodcurdling little raw’. In the very
midst of consecrating innocence, the modern mythology of childhood ascribes to
children a specially rampant natural appetite for all kinds of transgressive pleasures,
including, above all, the sadomasochistic thrills of fear. And these child heroes and
heroines now enjoy a monopoly on all kinds of unruly passions which adults later
have to learn to control in themselves.
Child protagonists have become so commonplace that the convention has become
invisible. In books written for children, from the great Victorian originals like The
Water Babies and the two Alice stories to the Billy Bunter and Angela Brazil series,
the Famous Five and the Secret Seven, as well as books by original and inspired
contemporaries of ours like Sue Townsend and Joan Aiken with their vivid
protagonists Adrian Mole and Dido Twite, it has become axiomatic that the child
reader enjoys identifying with a child. Films reaching - successfully - for the family
audience also place children centre stage: characters like Dorothy in The Wizard of
Oz, or now Aladdin in the new Disney cartoon, have grown younger and younger as
the cinema as a medium grows older.
The tendency isn’t limited to the growing market in children’s entertainment; the
child’s eye view has become one of the most adopted and fertile narrative positions in
all media: Henry James mined its dense and poignant ironies in What Maisie Knew,
still the greatest novel about divorce and what the papers call a tug-of-love baby. It is
interesting to glance at a list of really successful novels and see just how many adopt a
child’s eye: from The Catcher in the Rye to Empire of the Sun and, more recently,
Ben Okri’s The Famished Road and Roddy Doyle’s Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha. In the
cinema, the device gives the camera itself its role: what the child sees, the lens
follows, claiming equal impartiality of ignorance or innocence. Again, a list includes
highly successful films destined for an adult audience: the big-budget Witness, the
arthouse masterpiece The Spirit of the Beehive, Ingmar Bergman’s lyrical and tender
memoir, Fanny and Alexander, use the central perspective of a child to draw the
spectator into a different angle of vision, to make us accept the camera’s pristine
truthfulness, to intensify the pathos and the drama. By making us as little children, we
are helped to shed cynicism and resistance to the material on view, and to mind more,
because more is at stake - the image of a child always opens up the horizon to a
possible future, and so when the clouds lower, it feels darker.
The nagging, yearning desire to work back to a pristine state of goodness, an Eden of
lost innocence, has focused on children. On the map of contemporary imaginative
pathways, J M Barrie stands as firmly as the statue of Peter Pan gives West London
children their bearings in the park. He truly became a founding father of today’s cult
of children when in his famous play of 1904, he made the audience responsible for the
continued existence of fairyland.

5

CLIP: PETER PAN
Barrie had been so anxious that nobody would clap in reply that he paid a clack to do
so in the first performances, but then found that it was unnecessary. Adults applaud
the world of pretend and children follow. The statement of faith in fairies signals
collusion with Peter Pan, the boy who never grew up. It affirms the connection of the
adult with that childhood Eden in which the Lost Boys are still living. But at this point
a double bind catches us in its toils for the defiance of itself admits the impossibility
of Peter Pan and the Lost Boys’ state. Grownups want them to stay like that for their
sakes, not the children’s, and they want children to be simple enough to believe in
fairies too - again for humanity’s sake on the whole to prove something against the
evidence. Contemporary child mythology enshrines children to meet adult desires and
dreams, including romantic and surrealist yearnings to live through the imagination
with unfettered, unrepressed fantasy. In turn, this presupposes that the child has
access to a form of desirable wisdom of potent innocence which can’t tell pretend
from real, sex from sexlessness, a kind of supernatural irrationality. But perhaps only
a Kaspar Hauser raised in total isolation could ever meet these demands.
Yet, even as I speak, I can hear objections flying thick and fast: for every dozen
wonderful innocents in literature or popular culture, there are unsettling figures of
youthful untruth and perversity: children today, far from holding up the lit lamp of
hope like the little girl in Picasso’s Guernica, have become the focus of even greater
anxiety and horror than their mothers, than even their single mothers. Michael
Jackson was once a child performer of exactly that adorable cuddly cuteness that
makes grown-ups purr and coo. Now a boy sprite who won’t grow up, he epitomises
the intense, risky, paradoxical allure of the Peter Pan myth. He leaps and dances and
sings “I’m Bad”, gives his estate the name Neverland, draws the passionate worship
of millions of children, and then finds himself charged with child abuse.
We call children “little devils”, “little monsters”, “little beasts”, with the full
ambiguous force of the terms, all the complications of love and longing, repulsion and
fear. Jesus called for the little children to come unto him, and Christianity worships its
god as a baby in a manger; but the Christian moral tradition has also held,
simultaneously, the inherent sinfulness of children. Original sin holds up the spectre
of innate human wickedness: whatever glosses theologians put on it, Christian
children have been raised to believe that without divine help the species is bound for
hell.
But the Child has never been seen as such a menacing enemy as today. Surveillance
cameras register the walk of young killers on their way to acts of unimaginable
violence; special seats have to be made to raise these child murderers above the level
of the dock; my local paper wails, “Terror tots attack frail victim”; the most notorious
of the video nasties is called Child’s Play.
Bad children - a symptom of modernity - surface again and again in some of the most
powerful contemporary fiction, like Golding’s classic Lord of the Flies, a book to
bury in any time capsule seeking to convey the flavour of this half of the century.
Popular Satanist entertainment, including Rosemary’s Baby, The Exorcist,
Poltergeist, build on Christian theories of demonic possession to dramatise the fullblown development of evil in seeming cherubim. Gone are the cheerful catapults and
squashed toffees and fallen socks of a scallywag like William, the devilry of Dennis
6

the Menace. Horror has spread into teenage fiction too with titles like The Babysitter,
The Burning Baby, The Dance of the Scalpel.
Although the cultural and social investment in childhood innocence is constantly
tested by experience, and assailed by doubts, it has still continued to grow. The shock
of James Bulger’s death was deepened by his murderers’ ages, but their trial revealed
a brutal absence of pity for them as children. It was conducted as if they were adults,
not because they had behaved with adult consciousness but because they had betrayed
an abstract myth about children’s proper childlikeness. The consecration of childhood
raises real-life examples of children to an ideal which they must fail - modestly by
simply being ordinary kids, or horrendously, by becoming victims or criminals. But
childhood doesn’t occupy some sealed Eden or Neverland set apart from the grownup world: our children can’t be better than we are.
Children have never been so visible as points of identification, as warrants of virtue,
as markers of humanity. Yet the quality of their lives has been deteriorating for a good
15 years in this country; one of the fastest-growing groups living in poverty are
children and their mothers. The same ministers who sneer about babies on benefit and
trumpet a return to basic values fail to see that our social survival as a civilised
community depends on stopping this spiralling impoverishment of children’s lives.
The Child Poverty Action Group estimates that a third of all children are suffering
from an unacceptably low standard of living. Of the million jobs to be created in this
country between now and the year 2000, 90 per cent, yes 90 per cent will be for
women according to one official forecast. And yet there is publicly funded childcare
for only 2 per cent of under-3s. Meanwhile, the government is proposing to allocate
100 million pounds to creating prisons for 11 to 13 year old offenders.
To add to the difficulties economic individualism has brought us the ultimate
nightmare - not just the child as commodity but the child consumer. Plenty of
dinosaur lunchboxes at school; not many books in the library. Children are expensive
to raise, but all the products made for them unashamedly appeal to their pester power
as consumers of films, hamburgers, the right brand of trainers, video games. The child
as a focus of worship has been privatised as an economic unit, has become a link in
the circulation of money and desire.
That very vitality of imagination so envied in children needs to be tended and not only
by expensive theme parks. Yet the BBC uproots the tradition of children’s radio at a
stroke, citing falling ratings. Meanwhile, in the same playgrounds where Peter and
Iona Opie collected the skipping songs and hopscotch rhymes of generations, children
apparently now hang around having forgotten how to play. Local oral traditions are
dropping away just like larks and hedges. I am not turning into a reactionary Little
England ruralist, but children’s songs flourish in context in conditions when children
can play together in groups in safety. At present playgrounds and other school
facilities, among the only safe places for children, are routinely left idle after school
hours, at weekends and during the holidays for want of funds to staff them. Fallow
playgrounds are a tiny aspect of the disgrace. The hours British men work are longer
than almost all their counterparts in Europe, and yet the cry goes up about children
with only mothers to look after them. Children with fathers who live with them are
not looked after by them either, even when they would like to, since employment is
7

still structured to consider childcare the mother’s task. And measures which would
grant fathers paternity and sickness leave on behalf of children are rejected because
they might jeopardise profits.
Many of these problems result from the idea that childhood and adult life are separate,
when they are, in fact, inextricably intertwined. Children are not separate from adults
and cannot be kept separate, unlike Mowgli or Peter Pan; they cannot live innocent
lives on behalf of adults, like medieval hermits maintained at court by libertine kings
to pray for them, or the best china kept in tissue in the cupboard. Nor can individuals
who happen to be young act as the living embodiments of adults’ inner goodness,
however much adults may wish it. Without paying attention to adults and their
circumstances, children cannot begin to meet the hopes and expectations of our torn
dreams about what a child and childhood should be. Children are our copy, in little: in
Pol Pot’s Cambodia they will denounce their own families as class traitors; in affluent
cities of the West, they will wail for expensive trainers with the right label like their
friend’s. The one thing that can be said for absolute certain about children is that they
are very quick to learn.
We know by now that the man is father to the child; we fear that children will grow
up to be even more like us than they already are. Kaspar Hauser, the innocent, was
murdered; now we are scared that if such a wild child were to appear today he might
kill us.

8

