REITH LECTURES 1994: Managing Monsters
Marina Warner
Lecture 5: Cannibal Tales: The Hunger for Conquest
TRANSMISSION: 23 February 1994 – BBC Radio 4

In 1844 the great Victorian art historian and critic John Ruskin was bought a painting
by his father, as a reward for the success of his book, Modern Painters. It was a
picture by Turner, which Ruskin admired above all others, saying of it: “I believe, if I
were reduced to rest Turner’s immortality upon any single work, I should choose
this.”
Ruskin kept the painting for nearly 25 years, until he found the subject, he said, too
painful, and had to part with it. Before that, he had evoked his Turner in one of his
most gorgeous hymns to the sublime:
“. . . purple and blue, the lurid shadows of the hollow breakers are cast
upon the mist of night, advancing like the shadow of death upon the
guilty ship as it labours amidst the lightning of the sea, its thin masts
written upon the sky in lines of blood, girded with condemnation in that
fearful hue which signs the sky with horror, and, cast far along the
desolate heave of the sepulchral waves, incarnadines the multitudinous
sea.”
In all this welter of praise, Ruskin never tackled the subject of the painting at all. It is
usually known as The Slave Ship, but its full title is “Slavers throwing overboard the
dead and dying - Typhon coming on”. In the foreground, the drowning slaves are just
visible, while shoals of sea monsters are racing towards them to gorge on them.
Turner had read a history of the abolition of slavery and found that in 1783 the owners
and captain of a ship called the Zong were charged with fraud by an insurance
company. They had claimed for the deaths of a cargo of slaves by drowning. The
policy did not cover death from illness, and so the captain had thrown overboard, on
three successive days, 122 sick men and women in order to collect the money for
them. The insurance company proved their case. No further criminal proceedings,
however, were instituted by the courts against the Zong’s masters.
Turner painted this extraordinary synthesis of the trade’s horror seven years after the
abolition of slavery. His approach sublimates the theme: the drowning scarcely
appear. One black leg, shackled at the ankle, breaks the surface of the seething water
in the foreground; alongside, pairs of hands are raised making imploring gestures
which rhyme - with ghastly irony - the fins of many fish cresting the waves as they
arrive for the feast. Huge links of chain thrash in the water, rather implausibly, but
marking the position of submerged bodies below. Turner was always more interested
in the weather than in people, and he gives us just the one black leg, the waving
hands, and the great glassy visage and gaping maw of pink sea monsters.

1

Turner’s symbolic approach to the tragedy was later mirrored in Ruskin’s
evasiveness. Ruskin suggests a crime and cannot bring himself to name it. The ship is
guilty. The murderous deeds of Lady Macbeth haunt his prose, bloodshed stains the
sea, but he never faces the issues of race and power which the painting raises. Instead
he is vague.
“The whole picture,” he wrote, “is dedicated to the most sublime of
subjects and impressions, the power, majesty and deathfulness of the
open, deep, illimitable sea”.
The sea has played a central role in the making of British identity, and Turner is of
course its most passionate painter, as well as one of the most conscious patriots ever
to paint. And in The Slave Ship, Turner is reflecting on the passing of that grandeur of
spirit he saw in Britain’s rule, that glorious adventure and mastery which the Empire
represented around the world. The picture is an elegy for a lost vision, and perhaps an
ideal too. The victims are there not for their own sakes as protagonists, but as
witnesses. Yet what is of acute interest is that Turner gives so many different strokes
and colours to the single metaphor of consuming and being consumed, devouring and
being devoured. The dazzling wake of sunset and its reflection, which cleaves the
painting in two, itself resembles a kind of parted mouth open for swallowing. But
consuming retains its mercantile meaning too. Turner added some lines from a poem
he had written to the picture when he sent it to the Royal Academy in 1840. “Hope,
hope, fallacious hope, where is thy market now?” The bodies in the water are goods
destined for market and now spoiled. The false hope is the trader’s hope for profit.
Turner’s whiskered, jowly, even pink sea monsters moving in to feed on flesh stand
for the well-fed but still hungry, pink, whiskery merchants who trade in Africans. He
identifies himself with them - not with the dead and dying, not with the slaves. And
behind the slavers linger the shadow of Turner and his own kind. He writes that verse
of the poem, however bitterly, in the voice of the profiteer who has lost his cargo.
Something else is also hinted by the imagery of the marine feast in the painting: an
allusion to the deep-seated racial myth of cannibalism, to the much repeated notion
that the people who were sold as slaves were barbarians. And the most laconic sign of
the barbarian has been, since classical times, cannibalism. Those cannibal fish preying
on human flesh, representing the slave traders, bring to mind the question Montaigne
put three hundred years earlier when he asked, who were the barbarians: Christians
who hanged, drew and quartered their fellows, tortured them with irons and burned
them alive at the stake, or savages who waited till their victims were dead before they
cooked them? Turner’s painting raises a similar doubt: who are the cannibals now, us
or them?
MUSICAL CLIP (A LITTLE PRIEST): SWEENEY TODD
Cannibalism has become popular myth, turning up in the chilly outhouse aesthetic of
Peter Greenaway’s cinema and in thrillers like Silence of the Lambs. Hannibal Lecter,
cannibal letcher, has become such a famous character that, like a myth, he is larger
than the story which produced him. Sweeney Todd, featuring the demon barber who
ate his victims in meat pies, included a jolly flesh-eating duet and became an
international hit.

2

Cannibal stories are still widespread. The Independent on Sunday recently published
an article about New Guinea. “Now the Yali go to church,” said the lead-in, “and
most seem to have accepted the idea of God. But it isn’t long since some of the
missionaries were eaten”. Needless to say, on reading the article it is clear that no one
the author (Norman Lewis) talked to had ever eaten anyone; it is just something that
had always been said that was easily believed about this warrior tribe who hunt with
bows and arrows and wear long penis gourds and not much else.
Stories of cannibalism like rape were not always connected to myths about barbarians,
or even about monstrousness. Control of the processes of consumption confers great
power, as we know from the priests officiating at the Christian Mass. The faithful eat
the body and drink the blood of Christ in the sacrament of the Eucharist, and this
repeated miracle of transubstantiation possibly meets a fundamental human desire to
incorporate the object of passion, of wonder, of worship, dread, of love. Every time a
mother squeezes her child and murmurs, “Mmm, you’re so good I’m going to eat
you,” she is using the same imagery of union, of total commingling intimacy; every
time lovers pretend to gnaw and bite each other, they are tapping the same metaphor.
Oddly enough the fantasy of cannibalism is naively self-flattering: those enemies
want nothing better than to eat me because I am so delicious. In these well-named acts
of communion, a slippage occurs - between actual and symbolic consumption of
human flesh - and the arguments about the real presence of Jesus’s body and blood
have entangled further the confusion about the reality of cannibal acts.
Cannibalism is not, of course, a peculiarly Christian theme; it is common in classical
myth, where it is an activity of the gods, on the whole, like rape. Zeus, king of all the
gods, survives only because his mother, Rhea, foils his father’s plan to eat him, as he
has eaten all his elder brothers and sisters. She wraps up a baby-shaped stone in
swaddling bands and Cronus swallows it happily; Cronus had been told that one of his
sons would supplant him, hence his desire to rid himself of them. But his method of
doing so later casts him in the maternal role: for Zeus, when he grows up, gives his
father a drug which makes him vomit up alive all the other children in his body. In
this way, the famous Olympians - Hera, Demeter, Hades, Hestia, Poseidon - re-enter
the world, twice born of their father, begotten and brought forth. The devouring here
acts as a prelude to birth. The incorporation turns into a surrogate pregnancy.
The Greeks, it must be said, often felt awkward about the spectacular uncoothness of
divine conduct. The poet Pindar in his first Olympian ode apologises for mythic
extravagance and then exclaims: “Far be it from me to call any one of the blessed
gods a cannibal.” But he had to as he went on to describe the feast at which the Titan,
Tantalus, served up his son to see if the gods could tell the difference between roast
animal and human flesh.
Cannibalism often occurs in myth alongside incest; both demonstrate the gods’
outrageous flouting of human laws. Cronus commits one crime against human order
by eating his children, and another because they are his by his sister Rhea.
Cannibalism is a key metaphor of outrageous transgression and its imagery
traditionally conveys another: the crime of incest. This language recurs in medieval
stories like the romance of Appolonius of Tyre, one of the best loved tales of the
Middle Ages, extant in dozens of languages and manuscripts since the 10th century.
The romance opens with a king and his daughter, the classic fairy-tale couple. Only in
3

this case, he will not relinquish his beloved princess, but, “spurred on by the frenzy of
his lust, he took his daughter’s virginity by force in spite of her lengthy resistance”.
Afterwards she wants to kill herself, but her nurse - like Juliet’s, an unreliable
counsellor - persuades her to resign herself to her lot and live as her father’s secret
concubine. Her father than wards off all suitors by setting an impossible enigma. If
they cannot solve it, they will die. Many come and many fail.
Shakespeare’s late fairy-tale play Perecles was based on the Appolonius and the riddle
is put to the hero. “I am no viper, yet I feed on mother’s flesh which did me breed”. It
does not seem very tangled, and indeed Appolonius guesses that the lovely girl is
living in sinful union with her father. “Nor did you lie,” he tells the king, “when you
said ‘I eat my mother’s flesh’. Look to your daughter.” Incest figures as a form of
metaphorical cannibalism: eating your own. It also conveys a terrible incapacity to
recognise your own: cannibals fail to see their prey as their kind, and this is an act
which effectively exiles them from common humanity. Both acts also relate to fears
and longings in deeper ways: in both, the perpetrator oversteps the bounds of kinship.
When Princess Marie Bonaparte was considering incest with her son, she asked
Freud, who was analysing her, his opinion, and he responded with a comparison to
cannibalism. He wrote to her: “There are no grounds whatever against eating human
flesh instead of animal flesh. Still most of us would find it quite impossible”. She
seems to have agreed.
But the first image that springs to most people’s minds when they hear the word
cannibal is not a Greek god, or a fairy-tale villain. I was brought up for some of my
childhood in Belgium, surrounded by images of their colony - the Congo, as Zaire
was then known; among them many jokes about “long pig”, and much talk of
missionaries trussed and spitted or standing in stewpots over cooking fires, as patient
as early Christian martyrs in the arena. Some of this was facetious, but at the same
time it was not questioned - as it is not in Evelyn Waugh’s Black Mischief. Behind
these preconceptions lies a history.
In the age of the conquistadores, the word “cannibal” was adopted from the people of
“Carib”, in whom Columbus confidently recognised the famed anthropophagi, or
man-eaters, of myth. Like the gold which he was certain was always round the next
headland, it was always the tribe over the next ridge who were feasting on human
flesh. Columbus left the myth of cannibalism thriving, but no account of the practice.
By the 15th century, the sign of being a barbarian, rather than an ogre, was a
preference for cooked rather than raw human flesh. The word “barbecue” is indeed
one of the words, like “hammock”, borrowed into English from the language of the
Taino people of the Americas. Though the Taino themselves were famed for their
gentleness, the evolution of the word “Carib” into “cannibal” conveys how Indians in
the Caribbean came to be considered eaters of human flesh, never happy unless they
were roasting the spiced joints of their victims on these ingenious grills over open
fires. The name of Shakespeare’s “savage and deformed slave”, Caliban, in The
Tempest, echoes this derivation.
Eye-witness accounts have proved highly elusive, believers in cannibalism taking the
view that nobody survived to tell the tale, sceptics arguing that the fantasy recurs in
almost all people’s insults against aliens: Christians were obvious candidates for the
accusation during the Roman persecutions; later, in the Middle Ages, pogroms were
4

unleashed against Jews charged with eating Christian children; the same outrage was
considered routine among witches (they needed to render down baby fat to make their
flying ointment - only then could they take off on their broomsticks to the Sabbath).
So one excessive fantasy becomes necessary to another in the mad but lucid circuitry
of the imagination. In Australia, Aborigines were credited with a particular taste for
Chinese; rumours of their manhunts spread and are still being repeated, with no
evidence whatsoever.
When the Dutch painter Albert Eckhout was commissioned to paint the flora and
fauna and inhabitants of Brazil by the great soldier Prince Johan Maurits of Nassau,
he produced the most powerful existing early portraits of different tribes people - men
and women and children. In 1641 he painted a woman of the Tapuya tribe with a
severed foot sticking out of the basket on her back, toying with a severed arm in her
hand. But was he recording the evidence of his eyes? Flora are inevitably consenting
subjects, but his living models, the Indians who appear in the magnificent life-size
studies now in Copenhagen, may not have posed for the artist. He may have supplied
features from his own presuppositions. Eckhout even depicts a hunting party in the
distance, actually positioned between the woman’s parted legs, right under the apron
of leaves she is wearing while her hound laps at the ground between her feet baring its
teeth - all this conveying barbarous appetites.
Cannibalism marks its practitioners as throwbacks, barbarians, stone-age men, yet the
conqueror’s imagery can betray that he himself is the devourer, like the slavers
throwing overboard the dead and dying. Trophy-hunting is not the province of
savages: the cabinets of curiosities of the early modern connoisseur were filled with
grisly spoils. The phrase “I’ll have your guts for garters” catches the universal
impulse.
Cannibalism is used to define the alien, but actually mirrors the speaker. By tarring
the savage with the horror of cannibalism, settlers, explorers, colonisers could
vindicate their own violence. It is a psychological manoeuvre of great effectiveness.
Seeing the conquered as brute barbarians helped the confidence of the first empirebuilders. Early on, however, there were dissenting voices. Montaigne, who had
reminded his readers that they were as savage as their victims, lamented the
plundering of the New World in a great threnody:
. . . so many goodly citties ransacked and razed; so many nations
destroyed and made desolate; so many infinite millions sic of harmelesse
peoples of all sexes, stages and ages, massacred, ravaged and put to the
sword; and the richest, the fairest and the best part of the world
topsiturvied, ruined and defaced for the traffick in Pearles and Pepper.
Oh mechanical victories, oh base conquest!
Montaigne’s passionate defence of the Indians seems to have affected Shakespeare in
The Tempest. The play was inspired by the miraculous survival of a group of early
colonists after a shipwreck in the Caribbean; and Shakespeare follows reports of first
contacts when he describes how Caliban greets the mariners kindly and helps them
survive by gathering unfamiliar food and fishing for them. Like the Indians whom
buccaneers treated with - Roger North in Guyana and Walter Raleigh in Virginia Caliban shows the new arrivals, Prospero and his daughter, “the wonders of the isle”.
5

In spite of the overtones of Caliban’s name, Shakespeare does not represent his
“monster” as a consumer of human flesh at all, but rather of “pig-nuts” and “filberts”.
But Shakespeare’s portrait is ambiguous, as the amount and variety of stagings and
interpretations show. He calls Caliban “savage”, “a freckled whelp, hag-born”, who
does not know language before Prospero teaches him and has since learnt only how to
curse.
This contradiction at the heart of the characterisation has turned Caliban into a mythic
figure beyond the confines of The Tempest, and he has consequently become a key
symbol in the discussion of colonialism, and of its attendant ills, including racism.
Caliban has been played over the years as a kind of fish, or as a manatee, as a wild
man like Orson the bear-cub, as a green man, a classical Satyr, a half-naked Indian,
or, as one actor’s wife commented, “half-monkey, half-coconut”. In the post-war
period, when the various empires were beginning to unravel, the figure of the
dispossessed native slave inspired new interpretations - from Caliban’s point of view.
W H Auden, in The Sea and the Mirror of 1944, glimpsed how Caliban might refuse
to be the subject of his masters’ serene providence, how the relations of dominance
and economic power might crack. The colonial psychologist Octave Mannoni
pioneered in 1950 the explicit interpretation of Caliban as a colonial subject, raging
impotently against his oppression, unable to articulate his freedom or his rights,
caught in a vicious spiral of powerlessness and petty retaliation.
Caliban’s role touches one of the most sensitive areas in contemporary race relations;
he reveals once again how the perception of civilisation and barbarism so often turns
on the question of alliance and family. The exchange between Prospero and Caliban,
when Prospero gives the reasons for his rejection of Caliban, is highly revealing.
PROSPERO:
I have us’d thee,
Filth as thou art, with human care; and lodg’d thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child . . .
CALIBAN:
O ho, O ho! woulds’t it had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.
So Caliban’s segregation as a monster beyond the pale takes place only after he has
tried to “violate”' Miranda. Before that, he had lived with them, as if he were one of
the family.
But one rape could hardly have engendered a population for the island - these lines
express those old fears of heterodox misalliance; they also hint at a kind of incest
between Caliban as Prospero’s foster child and Miranda, Prospero’s daughter.
Caliban’s threat conveys too the fear of hybridisation: the monster might produce
monstrous progeny.
These same fantasies continue in popular attitudes to black immigration and to
intermarriage between races. Caliban’s threat of proliferation continues to resonate:
6

when people are asked to give the size of the black population in Britain, they
sometimes put it as high as a quarter of the total. The true figure is around a twentieth.
The Runnymede Trust in 1991 conducted a survey and found that more than 90 per
cent made wildly exaggerated guesses at this proportion.
The Tempest concludes with the restoration of harmony, the obedient love of Miranda
and Ferdinand, and Caliban’s promise that he will “be wise hereafter and sue for
grace”, a reference to his possible baptism.
It is interesting to note that in 1611, that is around the time Shakespeare was writing
the play, the son of a prince from Guinea called Caddi-biah - another echo of the
name Caliban - was christened in the church of St Mildred Poultry in the City of
London, the very quarter where stood the Rose and the Globe theatres and the inns
Shakespeare frequented. The boy had been entrusted to a John Davies, of the English
ship the Abigail, by his father. Or so the baptismal register related.
Even if the coincidence of his name Caddi-biah is meaningless, the presence of the
Christian, African youth in London upsets received ideas about the history of
migration; it puts pay to the prevalent opinion that black people only arrived in this
country with the waves of workers invited after the war. There are entries in parish
registers from the 17th century of births and deaths of children born to English and
African couples; while abroad, in the new possessions, intermarriage was far more
common than has been admitted. Not all converted, however: the brother-in-law of
the famous princess of the Algonquin tribe, Pocahontas, refused to be baptised,
preferring, a contemporary reported, “to sing and dance his diabolical measures”.
The Church of St Mildred Poultry was bombed in the blitz. Only office buildings,
gleaming in glass and steel, now rise around the area. The disappearance of so many
of the old City buildings has been followed by the disappearance of most of the
residents. This scattering in itself has carried off the memory of an earlier time including the recollection of the earliest black Englishmen and women. Yet far less
historically attested tales cling on about cannibals practising savage rites in some
distant place.
It would be silly to pretend that in the violence of conquest nobody was ever
barbarically dismembered or butchered or hideously dealt with after death, and there
is evidence for ritual ingestion of human remains at funeral feasts, as well as the
obvious bloodthirsty human sacrifices of the Aztecs. But empirical support for
cannibalism as a routine form of sustenance has never been found. That it was a
needed source of protein, as one historian has even suggested, is simply fanciful. Yet
the idea refuses to go away. A BBC series on the empire included an introduction to
the Caribbean which said: “When the British first arrived, the necklace of lush
tropical islands was still largely the preserve of cannibals”. This was 1972. It is really
only in the last decade that historical study has established how deeply fantasy shapes
the story and the chronicles of conquest. Cannibalism helped to justify of course the
presence of the invader, the settler, the trader, bringing civilisation. The centre has to
draw outlines to give itself definition. The city has need of the barbarians to know
what it is. The self needs the other to establish a sense of integral identity. If my
enemies are like me, how can I go on feeling enmity against them?

7

That imagery of forbidden ingestion masked other powerful longings and fears - about
mingling and hybridity, about losing definition, about swallowing and being
swallowed - fears about a future loss of identity, about changes that history itself
brings.
But new voices are being raised to confront this legacy. The terrible story which
inspired Turner to paint The Slave Ship has continued to resonate; it has that extreme,
cautionary quality of myth. Barry Unsworth, in his novel Sacred Hunger, developed
the Zong’s crime: and the Guyanese-born poet David Dabydeen has written a long
lyric sequence, called Turner - which, unlike the artist, unlike Ruskin - gives a voice
to one of the drowned slaves in the painting and imagines the atrocity from his point
of view. The drowned slave struggles to dream of the future he has lost and still wants
to make, but his memories oppress him:
No noise
Comes from my mouth, no lamentation
As I fall towards the sea, my breath held
In shock until the waters quell me.
Struggle came only after death, the flush
Of betrayal, the hate hardening my body
Like cork, buoying me when I should have sunk to these depths. . .
I wanted to begin anew in the sea
but . . . my face was rooted
In the ground of memory, a ground
stampeded
By herds of foreign men who swallow all its fruit
And leave a trail of dung for flies
To colonise; a tongueless earth, bereft
Of song except for the idiot witter
Of wind through a dead wood.
Dabydeen is using his poem to repair that loss, he is putting his song in the place of
his subject’s imposed silence. From submersion, from engulfment, the images can
return, the drowned can rise, the devoured be pieced together and the cannibalised
past be heard, telling its stories.

8

