REITH LECTURES 1994: Managing Monsters
Marina Warner
Lecture 2: Boys Will Be Boys
TRANSMISSION: 2 February 1994 – BBC Radio 4

As I was going to the Future Entertainment Show held in Olympia last year, I soon
found I was the only woman waiting for the Tube. The station was unusually full for
the middle of the morning, with scattered young men in jeans and trainers, gaggles of
young boys, one or two fathers. When the train came and the carriage doors opened, a
rather dazed looking London pigeon fluttered out. A man near me laughed. “Don't
worry,” he said, “it's only a virtual reality pigeon.”
I streamed in to the show with the crowd, clutching my razzle-dazzle, hi-tech,
impossible-to-forge ticket, and plunged into the roaring hall. The video games
industry has grown in value from almost nothing to 700m pounds over the past four
years. On multiple screens the season’s new offerings in interactive play and 3-D
simulation were being triggered by the very latest in ergonomic joypads to keep
bleeping, scrolling, beaming up, blasting, crashing, bursting into flames and starting
up again. I wasn’t the only woman any longer: there were one or two grannies, one or
two mums. And the marketing staff on the stalls were almost all women - “skirt
power” to the trade - and they were selling and busking in green bug costumes as
zools or zoozes or other technological gremlins. But we were interlopers. It was a
man’s world. The customers and players were almost all boys.
In the “chill-out zone” in the gallery, at stands and on platforms, the players at the
banked consoles of games were busy zapping and slicing and chopping and headbutting and dragon-punching. Popular culture teems with monsters, with robots,
cyborgs and aliens, fiends, mutants, vampires and replicants. Millennial turmoil, the
disintegration of so many familiar political blocs and the appearance of new national
borders, ferocious civil wars, global catastrophes from famine to Aids, threats of
ecological disasters, of another Chernobyl, of larger holes in the ozone - all these
dangers feed fantasies of the monstrous. At the same time, scientific achievements in
genetics, reproduction, cosmetic surgery and transplants have also raised tough and
unresolved ethical anxieties about the manufacture of new beings. These are reflected
in myths at every level of our culture: in the plots of books, in films, advertisements,
song lyrics, and games. These monsters are made actual; they seem to surround us.
The manuals accompanying the role playing game of Dungeons and Dragons
illustrate the ghast or the ghoul, the flail snail or the dimensional shambola with
diagrams of their thumb grib or their bite and provide maps of where they roam. And
in games like Streets of Rage, Mortal Combat, Instruments of Chaos, Night Trap,
Canon Fodder, Street Fighter, Legacy of Sir Asoul, The Rise of the Robots, Zombie
Apocalypse, Psycho Santa, Splatterhouse, the hero slays monsters - just as Jason and
the Argonauts did and Hercules at his twelve labours. Indeed some of the games even
quote classical adventures in their pantheons. But the computer’s capacity to
proliferate means that in video games there are many, many dragons, many monsters,
many enemies, many aliens one after another, and they all have to be shot and blasted,
1

hacked and slashed level by level as the player works through the stacked platforms of
the plot. Some maze puzzles, some role playing games require strategy, but mostly the
hero busts his way through. A review described the contest between Robocop and
Terminator. “It’s total cyberpunk ultra violence, the kind of game where you just kill
everything. It’s great.”
Myths and monsters have been interspliced since the earliest extant poetry from
Sumer: the one often features the other. The word myth, from the Greek, means a
form of speech; while the word monster is derived, in the opinion of one Latin
grammarian, from monestrum, via moneo, and encloses the notions of advising, of
reminding, above all of warning. But moneo, in the word monstrum, has come under
the influence of Latin monstrare, to show, and the combination neatly characterises
the form of speech myth often takes: a myth shows something, it is a story spoken to a
purpose, it issues a warning, it gives an account which advises and tells, often by
bringing into play showings of fantastical shape and invention - monsters. Myths
define enemies and aliens, and in conjuring them up they say who we are and what we
want. They tell stories to impose structure and order. Like fiction, they can tell the
truth even while they are making it all up.
Chaos threatens in various forms: the she-monster Chimera spat fire from three heads,
but the hero Bellerafon flying down on the winged horse Pegasus was able to pierce
her in her fiery gullet. The flames melted his spear tip and she choked to death as the
lead cooled inside her. Chimera’s name came to mean illusion: the ultimate monster
of monsters, who is both frighteningly there and yet a spectre, who shows something
real that at the same time only exists in the mind.
Reason can be awake and beget monsters. Extreme, fantastical, and insubstantial as
they are, they materialise real desires and fears, they embody meaning at a deeper,
psychic level. We are living in a new age of faith of sorts, of myth-making, of
monsters, of chimeras. And these chimeras define human identity, especially the role
of men.
In Mary Shelley’s novel Frankenstein, published in 1818, one of the dominant myths
today finds its most powerful and tragic expression. The book’s central figures have
leapt the boundaries of the novel itself into all kinds of retellings, periodic and
straight. It is no accident that it is being remade yet again for the screen this year with
Kenneth Branagh and Robert De Niro. Frankenstein has become the contemporary
parable of perverted science, but this reading overlooks the author’s much more
urgent message. Mary Shelley grasped the likelihood that a man might make a
monster in his own image and then prove incapable of taking responsibility for him.
When the creature at last confronts Victor Frankenstein, the creator who shuns him,
he pleads with him, using “thou”, the archaic address of intimacy:
“I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my natural lord
and king if thou wilt also perform thy part, which thou owest me.
Remember that I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather
the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere
I see bliss, from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent
and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy and I shall again be
virtuous.” “Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no community
2

between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength
in a fight, in which one must fall.”
Victor Frankenstein rejects and wants to destroy the being he has generated from his
own intelligence and imagination; he can only flee, and then, when confronted, offer
mortal combat - in the desire to be the victor, as his name suggests. Her novel pleads
on the creature’s behalf: he is capable of goodness if Frankenstein would only love
him and teach him and include him, not abandon him to his pariah state. The remedy
for Frankenstein’s hubris does not lie in destroying the monster; Shelley writes
explicitly against dealing with evil by heroic, lethal exploits. Implicitly, she is
recasting the monster in the image of its creator: the creature issues from Frankenstein
as his brainchild who is also his double, who acts to define him. Here the beast is the
one who knows this and presses his maker to accept it. Her extraordinary and brilliant
book inaugurates a new breed of monster, who is not ultimately alien, but my brother,
my self.
When popular myth places characters like Slugathon or Robocop centre stage, and
then annihilates them until the next Avatar appears, they are conjuring up the
perverted products of human intelligence. Unlike Mary Shelley’s book, these plot
lines almost invariably reject the offspring of science and propose the enemy
monster’s defeat through force. Nobody in this kind of story sits down to learn to talk,
as Frankenstein’s creature does so poignantly and so elaborately when he eavesdrops
on the English lessons given in the woodland cottage by the old man and his family to
the beautiful Arabian fugitive Safie.
Current tales of conflict and extermination never hear the monster say: “I am
malicious, because I am miserable” or “Make me happy, and I shall again be
virtuous.” The phrases sound absurd because we are so accustomed to expect the hero
to have no other way of managing the monsters than slaying them.
Monsters who manifest their nature, like Frankenstein’s creature, clearly present
easier targets than those in disguise. Deception is a theme that runs through the
history of fantasy art. It achieves a brilliant apotheosis with the replicants of Blade
Runner, Ridley Scott’s cult movie. Replicants are androids, impervious, almost
invulnerable; but they look human and they have been artificially provided with
memories of childhood. They do not know that they are monsters. As the word
android implies, they are men - and yet not men at the same time. This is the ultimate,
representative nightmare of this fin de siecle; 150-odd years ago, Frankenstein’s
creature suffered because he knew his own deformity. Jekyll and Hyde knew each
other well, though the evil Hyde, as his name tells us, was already concealed within
Jekyll. This is still optimistic stuff compared to Blade Runner. The film - and the
book - touch a live contemporary nerve when they imagine that the robotic monsters
look just like humans, that their nature is not apparent - neither to us, nor to them.
The acute, painful problem today is that these manufactured monsters are ourselves;
and ourselves especially as the male of the species. A recent shift in the telling of an
old, widely distributed legend illustrates rather well the new fascination and unease
surrounding men: in this urban myth, a woman living alone hears a strange sound
coming from her kitchen, and going in she sees a hand working its way towards the
latch through an opening that has just been sawn in the door. So she takes a poker,
3

leaves it in the fire, waits until it is glowing, and then attacks the hand which instantly
withdraws with an accompanying yell of pain. The next day the woman bumps into
the child who lives next door, who tells her by the way that her father was taken to
hospital the night before with a terrible burn on his hand. In the old, familiar version,
the intruder was a witch; a recurrent monster in such creepy tales. But she has now
turned into a man, an ordinary family man, a neighbour who - and this is crucial does not look dangerous.
Fear of men has grown alongside belief that aggression - including sexual violence inevitably defines the character of the young male. Another myth shadows the
contemporary concept of male nature: that intruder could be a rapist. Alongside the
warrior, the figure of the sex criminal has dug deep roots in the cultural formation of
masculinity. The kids who kill a series of ghouls or aliens can tell themselves they are
not like the monsters they are killing. But the serial killer - the very term is of recent
coinage - has a human face like theirs. He has dominated contemporary folklore, a
figure of thrill and dread, for 100 years. The terror of Jack the Ripper gripped the
Victorians, and present-day murderers are now interviewed on television from prison.
The partwork magazine Real Life Crimes, giving details and methods, sells around
60,000 copies an issue. The London Dungeon features life-size mannequins of
murdered prostitutes lying bespattered with blood; autopsy photographs of mutilated
bodies; and a café, brightly called Ripper’s Rapid Snacks.
Films - and the books they are based on - often mete out punishment to sexual
women, in the same way as spectators of the Ripper’s victims in the London Dungeon
enjoy the horror even as they shudder at it. But video games are more scrupulous
about current taboos: most of their heroes cannot be seen to attack and murder women
as such - with the result that women have pretty much disappeared from the plots
altogether. There is the occasional dewy-eyed girl hoodlum or pixie-haired hell-raiser
or salacious spider woman, and there are some female street fighters - all active,
assertive types and good examples of how positive imaging can backfire. But the
effect of the almost total absence of women from this all-engulfing imaginary world
of boys is to intensify the sense of apartness, of alienation, of the deep oppositeness of
the female sex.
Modern myths still approach the enigma of sexual difference using very old, simple
formulae - and if the girls are getting tough, the tough get tougher. In this emphasis on
warrior strength, the new stories conform to very ancient ones, stories which were
grounded in the different social circumstances of a military, or pastoral archaic
society - the heroes of Greece, the samurai of Japan. Slaying monsters, controlling
women, still offer a warrant for the emerging hero’s heroic character; this feeds the
definition of him as a man. But this narrative is so threadbare, it has come away from
the studs that held it to the inner stuff of experience: warrior fantasies today offer a
quick rush of compensatory power, but pass on no survival skills - either for a
working or a family life.
When the young Achilles is hidden by his mother in women’s clothes, because she
knows from the oracle that he is to die in the Trojan war, it proves child’s play to
winkle him out. Odysseus, the crafty one, disguises himself as a merchant and goes to
the court of Lycomedes, among whose daughters Achilles has been concealed.
Odysseus devises a kind of Trojan horse, a chestful of gifts overflowing with jewels
4

and trinkets and textiles - and precious weapons. The king’s daughters bedeck
themselves, of course, but Achilles girds himself over his frock with sword and
buckler and is unmasked by a triumphant Odysseus and carried off to win the war for
the Greeks. Pika Baroque paintings exist of the warrior revealed, grasping his
weapons while the girls primp; and the subject inspired a baroque tragi-comic opera
by Metastasio, which in turn prompted the English version called Achilles in
petticoats.
But the mighty Greek heroes are not the only models of the male. Achilles might
choose a mighty sword and Hercules use muscle power and a big stick. But in the
fairy-tale tradition, by contrast, heroes develop other skills. In the Arabian Nights a
poor fisherman finds a bottle in his nets and when he opens it a huge angry ogre of a
genie rises up and threatens the fisherman with instant death. The fisherman responds
that he cannot believe that anyone so awesome and so magnificent could ever have
fitted into such a little bottle, and he begs the genie to show him how he did it. The
genie obliges and gradually winds himself into the vessel. The fisherman jumps on it
and stoppers it up in a trice. He then refuses to let the genie out again until he has
granted him fabulous riches.
Cunning and high spirits are the mark of these hopeful myths which imagine a
different world, which hold out a promise of happiness and transformation. Some
sceptics might object that the cunning hero or the lucky simpleton does not belong in
epic or tragedy where the ideals of manliness are forged, but fairytale elements are
impossible to keep separate from the grandest of myths. When Oedipus meets the
sphinx, it is a battle of wits. No bloodshed accompanies his defeat of her reign of
terror. After solving her riddle, he just leaves her, whereupon her mystery undone, she
hurls herself from a precipice.
In Homer, Odysseus tells the cylops that his name is Nobody. So when Odysseus
blinds the cyclops in his one eye, the giant howls for help to his father, the God of the
Sea, and the other Olympians. “That all the Gods here,” is his cry, “nobody has
blinded me,” and so they do nothing. This trick from the Odyssey is literally one of
the oldest in the book. The hero who lives by his wits survives in countless hard luck
Puss in Boots style stories. Charlie Chaplin and even Woody Allen have worked this
groove, the heroic pathetic. But the gleeful use of cunning and high spirits against
brute force, the reliance on subterfuge have almost faded from heroic myths told
today. In the prevailing popular concept of masculinity, as reflected in comics, rock
bands, street fashion, Clint Eastwood or Arnold Schwarzenegger movies, the little
man, the riddler or trickster, has yielded before the type of warrior hero, the paradigm
of the fittest survivor.
It is striking to see from old footage of the Olympic Games how skinny and scrawny
athletes used to be; the bigness of men, body building, muscle toning has never been
so important to gender definition as it is today. This contemporary belief that fitness is
literally embodied in physical size neglects to pay attention to the rather more
important questions: what kind of way of life are the survivors defending? What
society are they making? It is interesting that the doctrine of the survival of the fittest
has become conventional wisdom. Opposing theories have pointed out that animal
cooperation and respect for resources are rather more necessary for survival than dog
eats dog. But ideas which stress thoughtful mutual arrangements and exchanges in
5

nature sound like marginal utopian New Age crankery.
Cunning intelligence - in Greek the Goddess Metis - has been superseded by force as
the wellspring of male authority and power; in today’s morality, force even feels
somehow cleaner, purer, more upright. The very word “wily”, the very idea of
subterfuge, carry a stain of dishonour. Boys are not raised to be cozeners or tricksters;
it would be unthinkable to train future men in lures and wiles and masks and tricks.
They are brought up to play with Action Man and his heavy-duty, futuristic Star Wars
arsenal. They are taught to identify with Ninja Turtles as crusaders, vigilantes,
warriors on behalf of the planet, to flick a transformer toy from a flash car into a
heavy duty fighting exoskeleton bristling with weapons: the Terminator, Robocop.
I am not advocating the conman over the soldier or the cozener over the honest
gentleman. That would be absurd. I am observing a trend towards defining male
identity and gender through visible, physical, sexualised signs of potency rather than
verbal, mental agility.
Such signs coarse through the hardening capillaries of the social system with
unprecedented fluidity, carried by a thousand different conduits in a million images
and soundbites. It is so obvious, but it bears repeating: no participant in the mystery
celebrating the exploits of Hercules, no member of the audience at the tragedies of
Agamemnon or Jason had their stories recapitulated and reproduced and beamed at
him or her again and again in a frenzied proliferation of echoes. This use of repetition
combines with another new and very popular form of story-telling today: the
advertisement. The principal task of an ad to persuade has altered response to the
myths advertising often absorbs and reinterprets. The mythic heroes of the Greek
story cycles like Oedipus, like Jason, like Orestes served as tragic warnings; their
pride, their knowing and unknowing crimes, the matricides and infanticides, selfblindings and suicides, all the strife and horror they undergo and perpetrate did not
make them exemplary, but cautionary. They provoked terror and pity, not emulation.
The tragedies they inspired offered their heroes as objects of debate, not models. No
one coming out of Oedipus at Colonus would feel he wanted to be Oedipus in the way
that a spaghetti Western today excites hero worship for Clint Eastwood.
But in the arenas of contemporary culture - the tv channel, the computer game, the toy
shop, the street - traditional mythic figures of masculinity like the warrior and the
rapist circulate and recirculate every day, setting up models, not counter-examples.
They are appealing to the group’s purchasing power, shaping tastes, playing on rivalry
and vulnerability. They do not cry “Beware”, but rather “Aspire!”
Boys will be boys, people say, when they mean aggression, violence, noise, guns.
Why does an age which believes in medical and scientific intervention on a heroic
scale, which works for change - and delivers it - co-exist with a determinist
philosophy about human nature and gender? The point about Frankenstein assembling
the monster from body parts haunts contemporary consciousness, but the book’s main
philosophical argument - that his viciousness is learned, not innate - that is somehow
overlooked. The biological and genetic revolution already upon us can alter and save
bodies, but stories which feature such bodies assume that their natures are static,
determined, doomed. Rare is the character in a video game or comic strip who
develops or learns to be different. Yet anthropology has shown that, in the territory of
sexuality as well as other human areas, social expectation affects character.
6

Masculinity varies from group to group, place to place, and its varieties are
inculcated, not naturally so.
Societies who expect boys to be unflinching warriors subject them to rituals of
traumatic severity in order to harden them. Among the Sambia in New Guinea, a tribe
in which men are warriors and nothing else, and women are feared and despised, boys
are removed into exclusive male control around the age of six, and then begin a series
of violent initiations to turn them into men like their fathers. Proper, cultural
masculinity does not come naturally, it seems, to a New Guinea highlander. Why
should it to a child living in Kentish Town or Aberdeen?
Among another rather less remote people living today in the Balkans, in the
mountains of Montenegro, the birth of a daughter inspires routine, ritual lamentation.
Blood feuds are handed down from generation to generation, and if there is no son
surviving in a family to carry on the feud, a daughter can be raised in his place and
become a sworn virgin, a warrior in disguise to defend her family like a man. Her true
sex will never again on pain of death be alluded to either in her presence or out of it.
When the Serbian-Montenegrin forces in the current war in the Balkans cursed the
women they raped, that they would bear children who would forever be their enemies
and fight against their mother and her people, they were behaving according to a
particular concept of inherited social beliefs. They were speaking out of a ferocious
commitment to military values, paternal lineage and a cult of male heroism.
I am not offering an excuse, a rationale, or an adequate explanation of men’s capacity
to rape and kill. But I am rejecting the universalising argument about male nature that
the rapes committed in former Yugoslavia are committed simply because men are
rapists. This argument goes, in the words of one prominent American rights lawyer,
Catherine McKinnon, “men do in war what they do in peace, only more so” and also
that “similar acts are common everywhere in peacetime and are widely understood as
sex”. These sweeping assertions work against mobilising change; they present as
sovereign truth beyond history, beyond society, the idea that the swagger and the
cudgel come naturally to men due to their testosterone, a hormone that, according to
this view, is always in excess.
Delinquency among young men has provoked acute alarm recently - one man in three
in Britain will have been convicted of a crime by the age of 30. And it is carelessly
repeated that single mothers are specially to blame.But it is interesting to look at the
problem of fatherless boys from another angle. The popular argument goes that boys
brought up by their mothers alone compensate through violence for the lack of a
strong male role model in their lives; that they express the anger they feel at the sole
female authority at home. But this could be put the other way round: the culture that
produces irresponsible fathers openly extols a form of masculinity opposed to
continuity, care, negotiation and even cunning - qualities necessary to make lasting
attachments between men and children, men and women. These boys are not deprived
of a strong masculine role model, they are not in rebellion, but are suffering from the
compulsion of conforming. They are exposed to blanket saturation in a myth of
masterful individualist independence. They are bit players training to be heroes in a
narrative which can proceed only by conflict to rupture. Men have been abandoning
their families, and almost half never see their children again after two years.

7

In Mary Shelley’s later, apocalyptic novel, significantly called The Last Man, the hero
exclaims: “This, I thought, is power! Not to be strong of limb, hard of heart, ferocious
and daring; but kind, compassionate and soft.”
It is a measure of the depth of our present failure of nerve that these words sound
ridiculous, embarrassing, inappropriate; that this cry strikes one as a heap of hooey, a
foolish dream, a chimera. Mary Shelley’s utopianism is too ardent for our cynical
times. But we can take away from her work the crucial knowledge that monsters are
made, not given. And if monsters are made, not given, they can be unmade, too.

8

