REITH LECTURES 1995: Sustainable City
Richard Rogers
Lecture 4: London; The Humanist City
TRANSMISSION: 5 March 1995 – BBC Radio 4

I have lived in London for more than 40 years, and, like so many of its architects in
the past, I have spent much of my professional life struggling with its problems and
dreaming of its opportunities. London has been one of the world’s most powerful
financial, commercial and cultural capitals for the best part of 400 years. The legacy
of that prosperity resides in its architecture, in its parks, in its theatres and museums.
London is still a world leader in finance and culture. But today the capital faces grave
economic, social, and ecological problems. London must urgently adopt a new and
sustainable approach that encourages its public life, discourages urban sprawl, and
protects the environment for the future. Today I will discuss how London could be
transformed into a sustainable city.
The London that welcomed my Italian parents and many others in the early 1930s was
a democratic haven from the persecution of European fascism. But the humanism of
this great city went far beyond political tolerance. London was the first city to create a
complex civic administration which could co-ordinate modern urban services, from
public transport to housing, clean water to education. If Britain was renowned for its
Parliament, then London’s County Council was acknowledged as the most
progressive metropolitan government in the world.
Fifty years earlier, London was the worst slum city of the industrialised world overcrowded, congested, polluted and ridden with disease. Public outcry and
Victorian confidence, backed by strong support from the press, led to inspired
planning legislation, and, crucially, to the creation of the LCC.
This pioneering approach to London’s management survived 100 years. In 1985,
Conservative central government destroyed, rather than attempted to reform, the
Greater London Council - a purely vindictive and politically-motivated action. The
GLC’s responsibilities now fall between five government departments, 33 London
boroughs, the City of London and some 60 committees and quangos. London,
Europe’s largest city, no longer has a strategic planning authority. Instead it has the
London Planning Advisory Council, isolated in Romford, 13 miles from the heart of
the capital. It has the sole mandate of offering “advice” to government.
If London was the first modern European capital with an elected government
authority; it is now the only capital without one. Elsewhere in Europe, city authorities
have embarked on ambitious programmes of urban regeneration; investing in state of
the art public transport, new cultural institutions, and encouraging the development of
mixed activity neighbourhoods. In fact across Europe there is an emphasis on
renewing urban culture.

1

By contrast, London is being transformed by policies designed to empower the market
rather than its citizens. Londoners have no direct say in their city’s affairs, no foil to
counter the search for profit in their city. The redevelopment of the huge Isle of Dogs,
certainly one of Europe’s largest urban projects, was carried out without statutory
planning or public debate. Londoners are losing faith in their city. People no longer
believe that London can provide a healthy, secure, and affordable quality of life. They
are voting with their feet. Over the last 30 years, central London has lost a quarter of
its population.
And to this dire situation, a new issue has been added. In environmental terms London
is one of the dirtiest and least ecologically sustainable cities in Europe. In previous
lectures I have spoken about innovations which will reduce our consumption and
pollution without a fall in our living standards. With no elected representation for
London, it is hard to see how citizens can safeguard the destiny of this city. As the
philosopher Alexi de Toquville remarked 150 years ago, “without power and
independence towns can contain good subjects but they cannot have active citizens”.
London is spreading outwards in ever-increasing circles. It is now served by a
commuter belt 200 miles wide, from Cambridge to Southampton - the largest and
most complex urban region in Europe. London is both sprawling and emptying out at
the centre.
This pattern of development has produced a city of huge contrasts. London, one of the
richest cities in the world has seven of the ten most deprived boroughs in the country,
most of these in the east. As the city spreads, the rot sets in at the core. Already 5 per
cent of inner London - large sites in areas like Wandsworth, Vauxhall, Greenwich,
Shepherd’s Bush, Lambeth, Hoxton, Waterloo and King’s Cross - are derelict. And
this figure excludes the huge empty sites of Docklands.
The time has come to halt this anti-social pattern of growth. London’s inherent civic
heritage - a constellation of towns and villages from Hampstead to Westminster,
Notting Hill to Limehouse - should consolidate the city around sustainable, diverse
and compact urban neighbourhoods. The fact that London is made up of a collection
of distinct towns and villages means that each community already benefits from its
own sense of character, visual identity, history and community. Instead of letting
London sprawl and allowing these communities to decline, we should be actively
reinforcing neighbourhoods. Large areas of dereliction should be used to establish
new mixed and diverse communities.
Professor Peter Hall has identified east London as a major opportunity for growth and
consolidation. It is here we will become inseparably linked to Europe through the
international rail network. Areas like the Isle of Dogs, Surrey Docks and the Royals
provide ideal opportunities to create generally vibrant and sustainable new
communities. The availability of land, the presence of water, views across the river,
and the prospects of good international transport are the ingredients for wonderful
balanced communities.
But government urban policy since the early 80s has effectively excluded a planned
approach that encourages new mixed communities. Instead the laissez-faire, marketled approach waits for developers to select sites and apply for planning permission.
The market favours out-of-town sites, where land is cheap, derelict industrial areas or
2

fields on the edge of the greenbelt. Invariably developments are for single-function
activities - retail, housing, business, or light industry, but specifically not mixed
neighbourhoods.
It is then up to the local authority to react. This often leads to expensive public
inquiries, an inspector’s report, and finally a decision by the secretary of state. This
process, as far as the citizen is concerned, is reactive rather than active. Costs of
public inquiries often run into millions, but only the developer reaps the potential
profits from the increased value of the land.
The result of this market-led approach is most clearly illustrated on the Isle of Dogs in
Docklands, with its chaotic zones of commercial development, clumps of offices here,
clusters of housing there, which has created no civic quality. Central government gave
big business massive tax relief. Government will now have to pay the lion’s share of
the Jubilee Line extension. Instead of gaining a vibrant and humane new borough, tied
into the framework of the larger metropolis, Londoners got a chaos of commercial
buildings linked by an amusement park train. The taxpayer lost money, the
community was alienated from the decision-making process, promised everything,
and left only with big buildings and more traffic.
I am convinced that if the right lessons can be drawn from the Docklands experience,
there is a chance of creating fantastic opportunities for London’s future. The new train
link to Europe provides particular hope. The impact that this will have on London can
hardly be exaggerated. Fifty years ago, “Heath Row” was an unknown village; now it
is the busiest international airport in the world, which has generated development to
the west.

With vision and strategic planning, the rail connection could have a similar effect on
east London and the Thames corridor. But this time we need to make the development
of the city to the east the subject of the broadest public debate. Architects and
planners from around the world should be consulted, to consider structuring growth
polycentrically around ecologically and socially sustainable towns.
Throughout these lectures I have been stressing the importance of reinforcing
neighbourhoods, but existing neighbourhoods are being put under severe pressure by
the impact of traffic. This is caused by the division of shopping, working and living,
which has required people to drive for every daily need. New superstores, business
parks, residential compounds and shopping centres have segregated the activities of
the community. Large retail outlets drain business and life from the high street and
their location in peripheral areas is attracting traffic.
Just recently, the Department of the Environment admitted that government planning
policy allowing out-of-town shopping centres has caused the commercial ruin of our
market towns - an effect that was already proven 40 years ago. But London’s towns
and villages have suffered as much.
Small businesses in town are weighed down by high rents and business rates, and
polluted and congested streets. Individual boroughs are fighting back, struggling to
improve the commercial vitality and physical environment of their streets, but this
3

approach must be co-ordinated across the metropolis and accompanied by business
incentives for those who stay and reinforce communities. Affirmative action. This
does not mean restricting industry, but encouraging it to serve and sustain the broader
community.
Traffic congestion is a critical issue. Fear of traffic has a profound effect on the way
we behave. Parents are not allowing young children to cross the road on their own,
and this is isolating children from their friends and making them less independent.
Nationwide, over the past 25 years the number of 7 to 8 year olds going to school on
their own has fallen from 80 per cent to 9 per cent. This issue of road safety is also
encouraging parents to move away from the centre of cities.
Take a map of London showing its local parks and green areas. Link them together
along the quieter routes. Where no links exist, use the canal ways, open up squares,
landscape abandoned railway lines, or simply calm traffic and pedestrianise roads. It
would not be hard, for instance, to create continuous cycle routes from Richmond
Park or Clapham Common with new pedestrian bridges to Hampstead Heath and
beyond.
Today government housing policy is undermining communities and encouraging city
sprawl. If we want to reinforce our neighbourhoods London needs homes within the
community which offer an affordable and friendly quality of life. London’s local
authorities built only 300 new homes last year. Last night, over 2,000 people were
sleeping rough in the streets. Today there are 120,000 people, including families with
children, living in London without the security of a permanent home. That’s more
people than live in Ipswich. We must build new homes to consolidate the
communities of our boroughs. London must break the bleak isolation of the hundreds
of thousands of poor who are trapped within decaying housing estates.
The typical estates of the Fifties, Sixties and Seventies were anti-city in their form,
and notoriously badly run. They have alienated publicly housed families from the rest
of the community. But estates like Broadwater Farm, Clapton Park or Hornsey scenes of unbelievable degradation and hopelessness - have been transformed by a
partnership involving housing authorities and residents, local knowledge and
resources. This must be encouraged and sponsored by government funding.
In London, new housing, even when (partially) funded by the taxpayer, is organised
through private developers or private associations. Their projects are designed to
satisfy consumer demand, and their results are assessed by central government for
commercial efficiency. Interesting schemes with communal facilities incorporating
squares, parks, shops, and schools are sacrificed in favour of dreary development of
rows of houses with small gardens. This approach perpetuates London’s low-density
sprawl, and cuts communities off from neighbourhood shops and amenities and stifles
innovation.
There is, however, an alternative: in many countries, most public housing is
subsidised, built by self-governing public housing associations, co-ordinated by the
local authority and debated publicly. Tenants are involved in the whole process,
including the selection of the architect and the development of the scheme. The
current British approach, by contrast, ignores the concept of integrating housing
4

policy into an overall urban strategy for creating socially and ecologically sustainable
communities.
Transport lies at the heart of any strategy for making our cities sustainable. Today
London has no concerted transport policy. London’s transport is dominated by private
car use, which is polluting the metropolis and undermining its communities. London
needs to act now to safeguard its future, but the Government is showing few signs of
determination even though it accepts that road transport is the major source of air
pollution in Britain - pollution, which is contributing to one in seven children in
London suffering from asthma or more severe respiratory disease. In London last
winter record traffic pollution was blamed for 155 deaths in just four days. (It is
estimated that 10,000 people in the UK die every year from dust particles emitted
from vehicles.) And if pollution were not bad enough, the Confederation of British
Industry estimates that traffic congestion cost London 10bn pounds in 1989 alone in
wasted energy and time.
A staggering two-thirds of journeys within London are by car. The Government itself
predicts that there will be a rise of 142 per cent in vehicular traffic over the next 25
years. But whilst 3bn pounds of taxpayers’ money was spent on roadworks in Britain
last year, major public transport initiatives have been shunned. Compare a 1930s
Underground map with one of today, and you will see that they are basically the
same.
Average ticket prices in London are approximately twice those in Paris, and five times
more than Madrid. With the belated exception of the Jubilee Line extension, new
lines, like the Chelsea Line or Crossrail, continue to be delayed, referred or simply
abandoned.
Other cities are addressing their problems of congestion and pollution with far more
determination, vision, and courage. For example, tax benefits should be given to those
who purchase small engine cars with catalytic converters or, better still, electric cars.
A system of road pricing should be implemented to deter cross-town traffic. Research
predicts that a 30 per cent reduction could be easily achieved if road pricing were
introduced in London. But these policies could undermine mobility, especially that of
the poor, unless public transport is improved and made more affordable.
Dramatic measures need to be introduced. What about making public transport free
for Londoners? One alternative would be to partially finance it by a metropolitan tax
levied on residents and employers. The normal subsidies would still hold for senior
citizens, the poor, and the unemployed. But the general citizen and London employee
would essentially be buying a yearly travel card at a lower than current price. Visitors
will still need to buy tickets in the usual way, but public transport would be
essentially free to all residents and employees at the point of use.
Travelling by car would begin to be perceived as an additional cost - in short, a
luxury. This would encourage people off the roads, reduce the volume of car traffic,
and so improve the efficiency and capacity of the bus service. That service could then
be expanded alongside long-term public transport initiatives, like trams,
undergrounds, light rail, and cycle paths.

5

London needs a co-ordinated transport strategy that has been evaluated in economic,
ecological and social terms. Currently car travel is cheap because it is sponsored by
the taxpayer. The external costs of driving - road building, maintenance, subsidies for
business cars, pollution, corrosion of buildings (currently a massive 3 per cent of
GNP), disruption to the local community, and ill health - are simply not reflected in
the cost of car, road or petrol tax.
We are used to being told that public expenditure on public transport is unjustifiable.
There are many economists, of all political persuasions, who reject this notion. All I
can add is a belief that we must strive as a society to differentiate between notions of
short-term accounting, and the idea of investment. Public transport infrastructure will
be useful to society for decades, possibly centuries to come. Its cost must be viewed
in the long term, and in the context of the overall improvements to the city as a whole.
Good public transport makes London more competitive and energy efficient,
Londoners more mobile and healthier. It will make their city more beautiful.
London’s great public spaces - Parliament Square, Piccadilly Circus, Trafalgar Square
and its courtyards such as Horse Guards Parade, Somerset House and Burlington
House - have been overwhelmed by cars, and this situation actually gets worse in
local centres such as Hammersmith, Shepherd’s Bush, Brixton, Dalston or Elephant
and Castle. A shift from private to public transport will give Londoners the
opportunity to swap highways for public places. This would have a fundamental
effect on Londoners’ ability to enjoy their rich heritage and reinforce their borough
communities.
The experience of the “ring of plastic” in the City of London is particularly
encouraging. Designed as an emergency measure to counter terrorism, the restriction
of through traffic, imposed by the Corporation of London, has effectively debunked
theories that the commercial vitality of a city centre relies on accessibility by car. The
scheme has improved air quality in the City and reduced road casualties and crime. It
is so popular with City workers that it is now being considered as permanent policy.
Imagine the implication of such restrictions when applied to other parts of London.
Trafalgar Square, once the heart of the empire, is now the centre of a roundabout.
Tourists are disappointed by it; Londoners ignore it. But the square could easily be
transformed by pedestrianising the road which cuts it off from the National Gallery. A
new gyratory at the top of Whitehall would allow this transformation. This would
create a new open-air sculpture terrace, linking the National Gallery to the square, and
liberating the square to the rest of London. Trafalgar Square itself could be
remodelled to include cafes and activities in a discreet arcade tucked below its
existing terrace. It would create a vibrant meeting place for Londoners, a place to
enjoy outstanding views of the turrets, domes and towers of Whitehall and the Palace
of Westminster.
Albertopolis - the collection of major museums and universities in South Kensington,
including the Albert Hall and the Victoria and Albert Museum - could be connected
across the road into Hyde Park. Exhibition Road could become a pedestrianised
millennium avenue, part of a network of tree-lined routes. A million trees could be
planted to define these routes across the city for pedestrians and cyclists.

6

Similar schemes rerouting, bearing or pedestrianising roads could liberate misused
public spaces throughout London. Parliament Square could be linked to Westminster
Abbey to become London’s proudest place. Shepherd’s Bush could regain its link to
its surrounding community. These spaces could be made into civic squares for people
- outdoor living rooms for London citizens.
But the real heart of London is the river. Look at any satellite image and it is the
Thames that dominates. Today the river separates the poorer south of London from
the more prosperous north. It is this huge and beautiful waterway which holds the key
to revitalising the metropolis. It must once again become a cohesive element linking
communities.
We need an effective river transport system, which would make the Thames a
stepping stone from which to reach the rest of London. We need new transport piers
from Kew to Greenwich, with a riverbus service which is integrated into London’s
transport network. Local piers should also locate the heart of new communities, with
shops, and amenities - forming the basis of a linear city focused on the Thames.
We have only one third of the number of bridges compared to central Paris. London
needs many more. A well-designed single-span bridge for pedestrians and cyclists
costs around 3mn pounds. Where the pedestrian flow is substantial, we could build
inhabited bridges, like the old London Bridge.

But there is one area that suggests itself above all others to revive the spirit. The
stretch of the river from Westminster Bridge to Tower Bridge, at the very centre of
the nation’s capital, is an under-used public amenity, bordering London’s richest and
poorest communities. This area should become the focus of a great Millennium
Project - a project about public place rather than national monuments.
The banks which ring this stretch of the river contain some of the most famous
buildings, and some of our most important cultural institutions - from the Houses of
Parliament to the Tower of London, from Tower Bridge to the Festival Hall. It is also
less than 500 metres from Covent Garden, St Paul’s, the Strand, the Old Vic, and
Waterloo station, although we never associate these places with the river.
In 1986, we proposed a new riverside park from Parliament to Blackfriars on the
north bank of the Thames by rerouting the road. It would consolidate the existing
gardens to create a sweeping 2km linear riverside park with cafes and restaurants - the
first major London park this century. The park could also spill out into the river, on to
floating islands with moored ships, pontoons and continuous boardwalks linking
major monuments.
The north and south banks need to be connected by more pedestrian links and bridges.
The City of London corporation are proposing to build a new pedestrian bridge
linking St. Paul’s to Bankside. A bridge in line with Trafalgar Square would connect
the South Bank directly into the pedestrian realm of central London. The architect
Michael Hopkins has proposed a cable car link from Covent Garden, which would
travel over the linear park and arrive on the South Bank. The South Bank is
undergoing radical transformation: there is the New Shakespearean Centre, the new

7

Tate Museum of Modern Art at Bankside, housing and workshops on Coin Street. I
would also suggest the transformation of County Hall for public use.

On the South Bank Arts Centre, we are looking at ways of reinforcing the vitality of
the riverside by encouraging new events. Part of the proposals include an undulating
crystal canopy enclosing the terraces and spaces between the Festival Hall and the
Hayward galleries - an open-air structure which could increase and control the
temperature of the open public spaces below it. A three degree difference could give it
a climate similar to Bordeaux. This could change the use of this beautiful promenade
throughout the year. But the actual river and the spaces between all these institutions
should be designed and integrated. It is here that millennium funds could be used to
transform the area.
But this project, that crosses the boundaries of so many boroughs and authorities,
could only be achieved by an overall London authority. This magnificent stretch of
the river that links some of our most important institutions, both cultural and political,
and that is directly accessed by rail from Europe, can be revitalised with parks,
promenades, floating restaurants, bookshops and boardwalks. The rich combination of
river, landscape, culture and heritage would draw life back to the great Thames and
give Londoners a powerful public space at its very heart.
London must not be abandoned to the mercy of the market - to cars, pollution and
poverty. London offers every opportunity to create a cultured, balanced, and
sustainable city. But to achieve this, Londoners themselves must be empowered to
shape their future.

8

