REITH LECTURES 1995: Sustainable City
Richard Rogers
Lecture 3: Sustainable Architecture
TRANSMISSION: 26 February 1995 – BBC Radio 4

I have been warning that the misuse of resources and technology is undermining the
well-being of future generations. Last week, I focused on sustainable cities which use
technologies that reduce their impact on the environment and where communities are
structured around neighbourhoods. Today, I want to explore how buildings are central
to the whole concept of sustainable living, how buildings can shape our lives, how we
should be shaping buildings to sustain our future.
The art of building might have been created to protect us from the elements, but in
time it became a fundamental expression of our technological ability, and of our
social and spiritual objectives. An art that documents humanity’s ingenuity, sense of
harmony and ethics, architecture has resulted from a mix of social, economic and
spiritual ambitions - the complex motives of individuals and societies.
Today, that complexity of human motivation is being stripped bare. New buildings are
perceived as little more than commodities, entries in company balance sheets. The
search for profit determines their form, quality and performance. Our “bottom line”
economies ensure that there is no incentive to invest in ecological technologies that
only pay off in the long run, no incentive to provide a public gesture like an arcade,
no reason to landscape a building, or even plant a tree.
Look closely at an average commercial development and you can see just how pared
down, how crude it is. After a century of refinement, the steel or concrete building has
never been so cheap to build, nor built so cheaply. The pioneers of the modern
movement - Le Corbusier, Mies Van Der Rohe, Lubetkin, Prouve - turned to
industrial techniques and new forms because they offered social improvements and
creative freedom. Now the enormous potential of these techniques is applied to a
single end, making money, cutting cost. The profession is being restricted to turning
round the cheapest, largest building in the fastest time and dressing facades in one
bolt-on style or another. And to complete this grim picture, our buildings are
consuming half of the world’s energy and in the process are dramatically destabilising
the ecosystem.
And yet architecture is such a fundamental part of our lives. It is the art form to which
we are continuously exposed. It has the potential to nurture us all. In this lecture, I
want to explore ways in which buildings can enhance the public space of our cities
and respond to changing needs, use technologies that sustain rather than pollute. Just
as we have to confront our environmental problems, so we must re-establish ambition
for our architecture. Buildings should inspire, and our cities should celebrate society
and respect nature.

1

Cities are a compromise between individual rights and public responsibilities. In
1768, the architect Nolli drew a map of Rome. By blacking out the spaces that were
private, he illustrated all those that were accessible to the citizen. As well as the
passages, streets, squares and parks that we all think of as public, he also included the
various semi-public spaces - churches, public baths, town halls and markets. Whereas
Nolli wanted to show in two dimensions the spaces through which citizens could pass
freely, it is the mass of each building that defines the three-dimensional form of the
public realm - a seamless and constantly changing sequence of spaces - the city’s
signature. We feel this in the compressed public realm of walled cities when we are
led through narrow alleys, then streets, eventually to emerge into the drama of an
expansive city square, or in more open cities like Bath, whose circuses, crescents and
squares define pure and generous geometric volumes. Even across the grid of New
York, there is a checkerboard pattern of interconnected public spaces, from the pocket
Paley Park, to the Rockefeller Plaza, and the magnificent Central Park.
Today, the overbearing enforcement of security, the imposition of entry fees to
cultural institutions, the lack of public amenities and the dominance of the car are
reducing public spaces to narrow pavements. And the form of buildings is being
designed as if they were stand-alone objects, rather than elements that enclose and
shape the public realm.
And buildings enhance the public sphere in a variety of ways; they model the skyline,
landmark the city, lead the eye to explore; they celebrate the corner of a street. They
can contribute to a landscaped space, a public arcade or a covered way through the
building. But even at the most modest level, the way that building’s details - its
paving, handrails, kerbs, sculpture, street furniture, or signage - are related to the
human scale or to the touch, all these have an important impact on the streetscape.
The smallest detail has a crucial overall effect on the totality. A beautiful building
must, it seems to me, address these concerns.
Let me give some examples to illustrate how the public realm can inform the shape
and concept of a building. In 1984, we entered, and lost, a competition to design the
National Gallery’s extension in London. We started by extending our survey well
beyond the site, which had lain derelict since the war. To our surprise, we found that
this small site held the key to unlocking the isolation of Trafalgar Square - once the
heart of the Empire, now a polluted tourist trap encircled by traffic. Isolated from the
everyday public life of the city, it is only on the rare occasions when it hosts rallies,
demonstrations or celebrations that it regains its civic role. We proposed to reintegrate
the square by creating a pedestrian route, rising from Trafalgar Square to Leicester
Square, through the site.
The linking of the two squares became the driving concept of the project. We
proposed an open flight of public stairs from Leicester Square down to Trafalgar
Square. The route passed through our building - taking up almost half of the ground
floor and connected into Trafalgar Square, through a generous galleria, beneath the
busy road. Two independent, but crucial, public places were physically woven
together by a relatively small building.
When buildings contribute to the public realm, they encourage people to meet. They
engage the passer-by, they humanise the city. At a much larger scale, a competition
2

project for a vast conference centre in the heart of bustling and crowded Tokyo
illustrates how looking beyond the specifics of the brief to a broader context can
generate new forms of public space and new forms of architecture. The competition
brief required the design of three enormous conference halls. We assessed the impact
that a mega centre would have on this already congested site. Our conclusion was that
far from needing more building at ground level, the area, almost totally starved of
public space, would be better served by a series of open spaces with public activities,
but especially with room for people to simply slow down and meet. We proposed
suspending the building six storeys in the air, freeing the entire ground level for
public use and public activities.
To achieve this, we worked closely with a brilliant engineer, Peter Rice, on a
structural solution that could suspend these great halls and meet their tremendously
stringent anti-earthquake regulations that control all construction in Tokyo. Three
giant silver capsules, which contained the conference halls with room for 10,000
people, were suspended like ships in dry dock over sheltered public open spaces.
Access to the halls with their roof gardens was by glazed travelator tubes. These
crisscrossed above the public spaces, which themselves stepped down from ground
level and were ringed with cafes, exhibition spaces, restaurants, cinemas and shops.
The project evoked Japan’s shipbuilding tradition and remarkable industrial ability.
These two very public projects illustrate extreme examples of the interaction of a
building with a public domain.
As well as framing public life, buildings are the servants of the people. This essential
function raises the practical issue of how to ensure that architecture keeps pace with
their needs. Modern life is changing much faster than the buildings that house it. A
building that is a financial market today may need to become an office in five years,
and a university in ten. A building that is easy to modify has a longer useful life, and
uses its resources more efficiently. In social and ecological terms, a building designed
for flexibility enlarges the sustainable life of a society.
Designing greater flexibility into our modern buildings moves architecture away from
fixed and perfect forms. Palladian architecture, for example, derives its beauty form
its harmonious composition. Nothing can be added to it, nothing can be taken away.
But when a society needs buildings that are capable of responding to changing
requirements, then I believe we must seek to provide flexibility and search for new
forms that express the power of change.
With my partner Renzo Piano, we designed the Pompidou Centre with this in mind.
The building was not conceived as a monument but as a people’s place where
different ages, interests and cultures can come together. The centre contains a broad
range of activity, from cinema, music and libraries to restaurants, events and
exhibitions. We aimed to create a building which would not constrain the arrangement
of activities, but where the activities themselves could dictate the building’s form.
Our architectural response was to propose a framework of spaces that could be added
or removed, opened up or divided. And by organising all the columns, ducts, lifts and
corridors externally, the floors - each at its largest the size of two football pitches were left totally free of obstacles.

3

Access to activities was treated like a system of external public streets - free for
anyone to use, and enjoying views of the piazza and the beautiful Parisian skyline.
The escalators, streets in the air and viewing platforms, extended the public piazza on
to the facade of the building, and created a series of open terraces and glazed galleries
from which to see and be seen.
To reduce the apparent bulk of this large building, we created a facade that could
catch and sculpt the light. A layered façade - not a wall, but a series of transparent
screens, metal structures, with terraces and balconies, one behind the other. In order to
make a building that could be dramatically altered in unpredictable ways, and still
retain a coherence, we crafted a kit of parts that could be assembled in different
patterns - a stacked and ever-changing medieval village, rather than a neo-Classical
temple.
Every generation needs to reinterpret and reinvent its public institutions. The
Pompidou Centre was as much the exploration of the idea of a flexible and plural
institution as it was an exploration of flexible and fragmented architectural form. New
ideas require new form and this extends to all our daily needs and all our institutions be they for culture, schools, universities, hospitals, homes, or work. Flexible buildings
hinder the evolution of society by inhibiting new ideas. But if new buildings must
respond to the changing needs and minds of society, then we must also consider how
to adapt the vastly greater number of existing buildings; and leaving aside the
specialised problem of how to conserve the very greatest buildings, the issue of how
our general architectural heritage is to be preserved raises fundamental questions.
Restoring old buildings to their supposed original condition is, I would argue, a
spurious notion. The reality is that buildings have always been adapted, reshaped,
redecorated, replumbed and relit throughout their lives. But this living process grinds
to a halt in the face of over-zealous preservation. As a result, buildings become more
inflexible, more expensive to convert and constrict new activity. Worse still is the
practice of preserving the facades and hiding an entirely new building within. This
expedient solution to preservation reduces an interesting building to the status of a
historical shell - heritage camouflaging a modern, and usually banal, commercial
building.
By contrast, history shows us that even our very best buildings can be robustly altered
and modernised to respond to contemporary needs, and do so by creating a dialogue
between old and new. And here I am thinking of examples such as Scarpa’s
Castelvecchio in Verona, or Norman Foster’s Sackler Gallery at the Royal Academy.
Looking at the history of a building such as the Louvre, which has lived through
almost permanent change for hundreds of years, yet still retains its unity and speaks
eloquently of every passing age, I marvel at the continuum of culture that has resulted
in its present form - glass pyramid included. Certainly the finer the quality of the
building, the greater the need for high quality response: quality both of thought and of
execution.
Preserving whole areas of cities, or at least preserving the appearance of doing so, is
fraught with problems. A good contemporary work, executed with skill and integrity,
can in all but the most sensitive areas produce a far more complimentary result than a
contemporary building masquerading in a stranger’s clothes. Juxtaposing new and old
4

buildings is an approach ingrained in our citizen towns. In Britain I am thinking of the
way our cities revel in the contrast between Medieval, Georgian and Gothic, but also
sublime compositions like that of King’s College, Cambridge, where the great Gothic
chapel that once stood alone in a meadow is now contrasted with Classical and
Medieval - buildings of one age proudly rising beside those of another. And this is
borne out by superb examples: the Piazza della Signoria in Florence where Vasari’s
magnificent classical Uffiizi Gallery communicates so powerfully with the Medieval
splendour of the Palazzo Vecchio; or in Venice where the effervescent Byzantine
Cathedral is framed by elegant classical arcades in the Piazza San Marco. All testify
to the value of an approach that embraces change, ideas and courage.
Preservation must be favoured over demolition of a good building and replacement by
a poor one, but a building must not be preserved at the cost of stifling innovation or
deterring change. The importance of breathing life into our architectural heritage
cannot be overstated. Making museums of our cities ossifies society. The historian
Roy Porter sums it up: “When buildings take precedence over people, we get heritage
not history.”
I have been discussing how the public realm has to shape buildings and stating the
need for buildings to offer new ways of organising our lives. Both these concepts
foster a vibrant society and both reinforce the social dimension of sustainability. Now
I want to describe how ecological sustainability will contribute to forming future
buildings. I have pointed out that half of all commercial energy - that is, energy
derived from fossil fuels - is consumed by buildings. Long-term running costs far
outweigh the original capital outlay on constructing a building, and yet that is what
we tend to focus on. Roughly three-quarters of “everyday energy use” is consumed in
equal shares by artificial lighting, heating, and cooling. In all these areas a new age of
technological innovation is underway. The challenge for architects is to develop
buildings that incorporate sustainable technologies, and so reduce their pollution and
running costs. These developments have the potential to transform our buildings and,
as a consequence, our cities.
I wanted to look back for a moment at our opening example: the typical modern office
block conceived during an era with a large-scale use of cheap energy was the accepted
means of overcoming all problems with workplace environments. The typical office
block was designed to create a sealed internal environment, that operated despite,
rather than in conjunction with, the natural environment. Yet there are interesting
alternatives that can reduce energy consumption by as much as three-quarters. Let me
remind you that even a halving of the energy consumed by buildings alone would
reduce global energy consumption by a quarter. According to Scientific American,
buildings of the industrialised countries consumed, in 1985, a value of energy
estimated at 250bn US dollars.
Rather than rely on high energy consumption, architects are now beginning to explore
building forms and technologies that can harness natural resources - landscape, wind,
sun, earth and water - for their renewable energies.
In a competition project in Nottingham, the Inland Revenue specified a low-energy
building. We set out to investigate all the practical means available in nature to
produce a tempered environment without relying on mechanical systems and high
5

energy consumption. As opening windows on all facades was not possible, we
divided the building in two - basic administration at the back and social functions and
communal facilities nestling round the new garden. Between the two buildings, we
created a central landscaped courtyard - a type of small ravine. Around this gently
curving landscape, the two lines of buildings were linked by glazed bridges.
This landscape formed the visual focus of the building but also produced a useful
micro-climate. An average tree, for example, absorbs carbon dioxide, gives off
oxygen, transpires 380 litres of water a day and purifies the air in its vicinity. In the
summer, trees give shade, limit heat-gain from the sun and reduce glare into
buildings. Together with water, shrubs and plants, landscape filters pollution,
humidifies and cools the air. Breaking up very deep buildings with landscaped
courtyards creates local micro-climates that can condition air. Slimmer buildings
allow more people to get views out, place windows close at hand, and reduce the need
for artificial lighting.
Inside the building, air can be circulated without using mechanical fans by shaping
ceilings and roofs aerodynamically and by connecting floors to a larger space, or
atrium, that draws air through. As air in the atrium rises in temperature, the “stack
effect” pulls warm air upwards, and this draws air out of connected spaces.
To increase the natural draw of air out of the building, its roof profile can be
smoothed to respond to prevailing winds. Buildings can be shaped to reduce their drag
and consequent air turbulence in the vicinity. Architecture is becoming more
streamlined as its forms interact with natural forces.
Law courts that we are designing in the heart of Bordeaux apply these same ideas of
natural air ventilation, but in a far warmer climate. The need for good air flow in the
individual court rooms influences the development of their shape. Looking and
operating rather like an oast house the final teardrop shape evolved in order to let light
in at the top and air from below. Heat from the sun was used to enhance the “stack
effect” and generate enough ventilation to dispense with mechanical fans. The air that
is drawn into the courts is cooled as it crosses an external ornamental pool - a
reflective pool standing between a new court house and a great Medieval cathedral.
Fully glazed and transparent, the main hall overlooks the pool and the cathedral and
contains the seven individual court rooms. This public hall draws its air across the
pool but also uses the constant temperature of ground water in heat exchange systems
to further chill the air. The concept of double glazing can be expanded to enclose a
whole building in a coat of air and act as a continuous glass chimney. Buildings with
two glass skins reduce the impact of pollution and noise and allow windows built into
the inner skin to be opened into the all-enveloping transparent vent. From there stale
air is drawn out by “stack effect” and by prevailing winds flowing over the outer
surfaces. In summer the vent can be opened to allow plenty of air flow and shed as
much heat as possible. In winter the system is closed down to increase insulation and
trap heat.
The cool energy of night air can be stored in the internal structure of a building. The
Lloyds building, for example, has an exposed concrete ceiling that absorbs cool
energy overnight and sheds it during the day. This use of the thermal mass of a
building relies on circulating cool air overnight and reduces the need for artificial
cooling during occupation. These techniques are reinterpretations of devices that have
6

been exploited for thousands of years. Even the way the building faces is a key issue
in the design of a low energy building once we stop using powerful technologies to
overcome the environment.
Low-energy techniques commonly reduce the total commercial energy consumption
of a building by between a half and three-quarters. And Britain’s temperate
environment, for example, is very well suited to this type of system.
A solar powered racing car is formed to transport a driver as efficiently as possible
using only renewable energy. To do this, it has to minimise confrontation with natural
physical forces. Architecture too needs to minimise its confrontation with nature. To
do that, it must also respect nature’s laws.
In a recent research project for offices in Tokyo, we were asked to explore the idea of
energy self-sufficiency. We began by cutting to a bare minimum the energy required
by the building. All spaces were naturally lit. Deep spaces and basements, which
needed additional lighting, used daylight and sunlight that was concentrated and piped
through fibre optic cables. Ground water was distributed to cool the structural mass of
the building. The south façade was clad in electronic glass that is translucent when the
sun is shining, letting in cool light only, and transparent when it is overcast. The fluid,
dynamic computer programmes that we used to model the flow of air through and
around the building had been developed in the aeronautical and automotive industries.
These programmes allowed us to test ways in which we could use prevailing winds to
enhance the draw of air out of the building’s tower.
Pushing the issue further, we explored the possibility of adjusting the form of the
building to accelerate the wind over its surfaces. This eventually led us to apply the
same principle that creates lift on an aeroplane’s wing to the vertical facades of the
building. We shaped the form of the building itself to accelerate prevailing winds
through turbines located between the building and its adjoining tower. These turbines
converted the wind energy into electricity used to power building services during the
day and fed into the national grid at night. Taken over a full year our engineer’s
calculation showed that the research building achieved overall energy self-sufficiency.
It produced as much energy as it consumed.
Computer technology is one of the breakthroughs in the design of low-energy
buildings. Programs now available can generate models that predict air movement,
light levels and heat gain while the buildings are still on the drawing board. This
significantly increases our ability to refine each aspect of the design of a building, so
as to maximise the use of its natural environment. And it is computers that are giving
buildings increasingly sensitive electronic nervous systems, able to register internal
and external conditions and respond to individual needs.
New materials exist that are capable of changing from high insulation to low, from
opaque to transparent, that can react organically to the environment, respond to the
daily environmental cycle and transform themselves through the seasons. The future
is here, but its impact on architecture is only just beginning.

7

I have argued that architecture is about pursuing the broadest needs of society, and
about working our buildings into the cycle of nature. In my view, this is what brings
our art back to its very roots.

8

