REITH LECTURES 1995: Sustainable City
Richard Rogers
Lecture 5: Cities for a Small Planet
TRANSMISSION: 12 March 1995 – BBC Radio 4

Over the past weeks I have tried to draw attention to the problems of our cities, but
also to offer an alternative vision of the modern city. In this lecture I want to focus on
what practical steps governments and citizens, architects and planners could take in
order to achieve the kind of changes I have been advocating. But first, let me sum up
my earlier arguments.
I have stressed the enormity of the environmental crisis we face. We can see the
evidence of this all around us: in congestion, in the effects of acid rain, on buildings
and countryside, even in the difficulty many children and old people have in
breathing. Every survey brings more evidence that the earth’s atmosphere is warming.
Every year the statistics get worse on pollution, erosion, deforestation and the
extinction of wildlife, and it is clear that cities are generating most of the damage.
Of course specialists are unsure about exactly what impact our actions are having on
the environment. Will average global temperatures rise by 1 or 3 per cent in the next
century? Will this mean a rise of sea level by less than a metre or more? Do we face
catastrophe in 50 or 500 years? But I will insist that, given the evidence, we have to
apply what has been called “the precautionary principle”. Where scientific doubt
exists about the harm we are doing to the biosphere, the benefit of that doubt should
be given to the planet and its people. It is grossly irresponsible to do anything else.
I have emphasised that the ecological problems that our cities face are intertwined
with social ones. They both have a common source. The city is a rich, multi-faceted
place, which offers private pleasures, but also the chance for public life and a
spectrum of opportunities in between. The problem is that for too long individual
interests, and above all the search for short-term profit, have overridden the needs of
the broader community.
Anyone who has lived in a modern city will be familiar with the effects that this has
had. It has led to the segregation of activities into different zones: the promotion of
the car, the spread of the city over the countryside, the encouragement of inefficient
and hostile architecture and the neglect of the public realm - the people spaces
between buildings. These developments have had predictably disastrous
environmental consequences that have also launched cities on a downward spiral of
social decline.
The division of the city into different centres of isolated activity, the proliferation of
private, opaque, and ugly buildings, the promotion of the car, have undermined the
public realm. In place of the bustling street, we have the supermarket; instead of the
square, we get the car park. The result is that cities have become first alienating and

1

then positively scary. Eventually the rich flee, and the poor are left stranded in innercity ghettos.
I have also wanted to stress that our cities are not beyond help. There is a changing
mood. Where the environment is concerned attitudes have undergone a revolution in
recent years. Almost everyone now agrees on the supreme value of the natural
environment and of the need to take radical steps to protect it. Environmentally
minded economists and philosophers have responded to this change, developing new
concepts to describe and regulate our relationship to nature.
As long ago as 1966 the economist Kenneth Boulding argued in a groundbreaking
essay that we must “cease to behave as if we lived in a cowboy economy with
unlimited new territory to be conquered”. Instead we have to think of Planet Earth as
a spaceship. Every effort must be made to recycle materials, reduce waste, conserve
exhaustible energies and tap into renewable ones like solar power. But the single most
important principle to emerge is sustainability - the principle that economic
development today must not compromise the ability of future generations to meet
their own needs.
What I have argued in these lectures is that sustainability needs to be applied our
cities, which today consume a disproportionate amount of our natural resources and
pollute disastrously. The key lies, as the ecologist Herbert Girardet has argued, in
cities aiming at a circular “metabolism” by conserving resources, using renewable
energies, and recycling waste.
In the perfect scenario, the city gives back to the environment as much as it takes out.
Ironically, Third World cities, which are too poor to squander resources, often come
closer to the ideal than their developed counterparts. Cairo, for instance, although
larger than London, recycles most of its solid waste. Some European cities are now
moving in the right direction. The Germans have passed the Materials Recirculation
Law, which comes into effect next year. This law, which creates an obligation to
reduce the generation of waste and makes industry fully responsible for its disposal,
will have a dramatic effect on the metabolism of the city.
Tackling the social problems of our cities involves a radical rethinking of our values.
But even here, the recent revolution in attitudes to the natural environment paves the
way. We are getting used to thinking about nature as being of ultimate value; we now
need to think of the civic realm in much the same way. The terms in which ecologists
describe our relationship to nature - the idea that we are not owners but trustees with
duties to future generations - apply just as well to the city’s public life.
Public life fosters tolerance and a sense of community. It is no coincidence that in
racist or fascist societies the city was segregated. Sharing public space forces us to
acknowledge what we have in common. The public life of cities also plays an
increasingly vital economic function. Today, financial competition is more
international than ever before. Cities compete for investment not just against
neighbouring cities, but against rivals from around the world. And in this postindustrial age, investment is attracted by factors beyond the normal economic costs of
labour or rent. The quality of the cultural and civic life of a city is now critical.

2

In Europe this principle has become a political commonplace. Indeed, there is a race
on across the continent, with cities striving to outdo each other in commissioning
prestigious architectural and cultural projects, and inaugurating extensive programmes
of civic regeneration. Working in these cities, as I do a great deal, one gets a sense of
what the rivalry between the Italian city states of the Renaissance must have been
like. What the mayor of Stuttgart does, the mayor of Frankfurt, Lyon, Amsterdam will
determine to do better.
Nowhere can this be seen more clearly than in Barcelona where autonomy, vision and
strong leadership has totally transformed the city. Barcelona was catapulted into
reforming its congested, polluted and decaying inner city by hosting the 1992
Olympic Games. The development went much further than the provision of Olympic
facilities. It included the realisation of a master plan for the city, including the
refurbishment of Barcelona’s streets and squares and the construction of new housing
and services. The city council created a network of over 150 interlinked public parks
and places. World attention provoked the city into the wholesale revitalisation of its
defunct waterside dock areas. A new mixed waterside district and linear park put the
city back in touch with the sea. Overnight Barcelona again became a city where
people longed to work, visit and live.
But while the race goes on between Barcelona and dozens of other international cities,
we in Britain have still not grasped the economic importance of a thriving urban
culture.
The city that I have described in these lectures turns its back on the dominant tradition
of 20th century urban planning. Ebenezer Howard’s Garden City, Le Corbusier’s
Ville Radieuse and Frank-Lloyd Wright’s Broad-Acre City all, in their different ways,
rejected the dense mixed-activity city, in favour of more spread-out, greener urban
forms. Their aim was to combine the merits of the city and the countryside.

This is perhaps an understandable reaction to the 19th century industrial city, yet it
has become clear that these modernist cities lack the dense critical mass that is needed
to sustain the vibrancy of urban life. The city that I am advocating takes the tradition
of dense overlapping activity as its starting point, but reinvents it.
The sustainable city of the future will, I believe, need to be one of many facets. First,
a dense and polycentric city - because this form of settlement protects the countryside,
focuses communities around neighbourhoods, and minimises dependence on cars.
Second, a city of overlapping activity and easy contact, because it maximises contact
and diversity and fosters a vital public life. Thirdly, an equitable city - a selfgoverning, participatory city where wealth, justice and opportunity are fairly
distributed. Fourth, an ecological city with a circular metabolism, which gives as
much to the environment as it takes out. Fifth, an open city, which embraces new
ideas and experiments with architectural form. And, finally, a beautiful city, where
art, architecture and landscape move the spirit.
And most encouragingly, the current trends in the development of modern economy
are underpinning this approach. The industrial age is giving way, at least in the
developed countries, to the post-industrial: the age of telecommunications, cheap
computer power, the information superhighway, clean robotic and microscopic
3

manufacturing. All this is transforming the character of our cities, potentially for the
better.
The raw material of this new economy is citizens and their knowledge, creativity and
initiative. Art and science will be the lifeblood of these knowledge-based cities, and
the key to further wealth. Networks of small-scale companies are emerging as the
driving force of the economy of the future. The new multimedia technologies and
industries could end the division of the city into zones of housing, offices and
factories. Indeed, the distinctions between office and home, work and play, education
and entertainment are themselves set to dissolve. This type of small-scale economy
will give the city a finer, a more diverse texture of overlapping activities and
neighbourhoods, which will facilitate the emergence of a more dynamic, greener, and
more community-based city. The pulse of city life is set to rise.
Yet the new communication industries will only flourish within cities that have the
right mixture of educational facilities, public life and creative leadership. Cities like
Barcelona, Glasgow and Lyon are already striking out on their own, doing everything
to establish themselves as centres of the new communications age. That is why it is so
important that we invest in London and other British cities and provide them with the
resources and independence they need.
It is not just patterns of work that are being affected by these technological
developments. They are also revolutionising architecture. As homes, schools and
workplaces all come to centre on a common communication network, buildings
themselves will become less and less defined by a single function: the same
fundamental structure will serve as school, office and “factory”.
Changes in technology and the imperatives of ecology will make buildings ever more
flexible and responsive. Le Corbusier described architecture as “the masterly, correct
and magnificent play of masses brought together in light”. But in the future, buildings
will become dematerialised. It will be an age not of solids but of transparency and
veils - of indeterminate, adaptable and floating structures, which respond to changes
in the environment and needs of the users. The buildings of the future - already
foreshadowed in Britain by the likes of Will Alsop, Future Systems and Zaha Hadid will be less like the fixed classical temples of the past and more like moving, thinking
robots.
New technological developments will also have a profound impact on the shape and
character of the public realm. As structures become lighter, buildings will become
more permeable, and there is no reason why pedestrians should not walk through
rather than around them. The street and the park may be part of the building or the
building might hover above or below them.
The architect Cedric Price once said that the main problem with cities is that buildings
get in the way. In the future, this will no longer be quite so true. We can finally expect
a similar revolution in transport. The car is an outdated piece of polluting technology,
which is out of step with the needs of the modern city. If its cost reflected the social
and ecological damage it caused, it would rapidly be replaced by a new generation of
clean, quiet vehicles. The technology for this already exists.

4

High-speed train links, allowing fast, comfortable movement from city centre to city
centre, are also set to reinforce the importance of cities as hubs of communication and
contact. The newest generation of trains already travel at nearly 200mph, but magnetlevitation trains, which are now being tested, will double that speed. In the not-toodistant future, a vacuum-tunnel transport system travelling at 1,000 mph will make
trains compete with planes on long-haul destinations. We will soon travel
underground from London to New York or Moscow.
We are witnessing technological developments that, if creatively exploited, could give
our cities a new lease of life, making them greener, more sociable, more beautiful above all more exciting.
I have talked about the ideals to which we should be aspiring, but how do we
implement change? Present-day market economics is based on producing goods,
including urban development, at minimum short-term cost with little consideration for
long-term effects. The result of this short-termism on health, global warming and
general quality of life is catastrophic.
Take the case of petrol. Today it is cheaper than mineral water, despite the pollution
that its consumption causes. This is because goods in the free market are priced
entirely on the basis of manufacturing cost and exclude all external damage. We are
essentially consuming cheap petrol now at the expense of long-term environmental
damage. It is not that we should jettison the free market, but we do have to make sure
that it takes into account our long-term interests.
Environmental economists like David Pearce argue that government can manage the
market so that it avoids creating short-term efficiency at the cost of long-term
ecological damage. This requires government to apply levies on activities which
reflect their external costs, and this would have the effect of steering research,
development and production towards greener and more sustainable solutions.
For example, governments can encourage sustainable city development by applying
levies to deter the market from construction, which undermine communities and
generate pollution and congestion like out of town shopping centres and business
parks. These types of levies would encourage developers and architects to create
sustainable developments without government having to be directly prescriptive and
risk choking innovation.
It is important that government makes the purpose of “sustainability” levies
transparent by earmarking the revenue they raise for specific sustainable projects. For
example, using the revenue from an increased tax on petrol to improve or subsidise
public transport.
Research shows that this type of taxation and expenditure is far more acceptable to the
general public who also begin to feel involved in the process of improving their
environment. We need to reform our tax system to sponsor sustainable development,
to discourage short-termism by offering tax incentives for long-term investment. The
way land taxes currently operate effectively means that taxpayers are subsiding
unsustainable development. For example, the last 15 years have seen the very
profitable development of large commercial and retail outlets located on new roads.
These publicly financed roads have effectively transformed low-value agricultural
5

land into highly accessible and valuable commercial property. Taxpayers have paid
for roads and services, and private developers and landowners have gained the
financial benefit. Land taxes for retail, business and residential developments on outof-town sites should reflect the real contribution of publicly financed infrastructure.
This will make locating locally more competitive, and in the long run will encourage
developers and retailers to consolidate the sustainability of the city rather than making
it sprawl.
Environmental policies will never be effective unless we can co-ordinate them
internationally. In the first place, we need to establish a common international
standard of measurement, enabling us to assess the performance of cities to set
ecological targets and monitor the extent to which they are moving towards a circular
metabolism. If this information is available to public scrutiny, there is a very real
pressure on government. But more than that. Governments that have committed
themselves to ecological targets must also suffer penalties if these targets are not
reached. Unless eco-taxes are levied and enforced across borders, polluting industries
will simply relocate to another country.
Beyond reforming taxation, we need to revise the workings of government itself. The
system where department policies pull in different directions without an overarching
environmental strategy is incomprehensible. The ministries of trade and industry and
transport still see it as their job to promote cars. Ministries of environment and health
see theirs as curbing them. Sustainable city planning demands a holistic understanding
of the city, its services, its transport policies, its energy generation and its impact on
the region. If the city is to create real sustainability, then all these factors must be
related together. Here there can be no substitute for overall city-wide strategic
planning; and as our relationship to the environment becomes ever more complex and
precarious, so city planning becomes one of the most important disciplines. We must
value it by raising its profile and providing it with all appropriate resources.
Our planning legislation must be specifically revised to promote sustainability and
architectural quality. One particularly invidious problem is that a planning permission,
which is secured on the basis of a high-quality scheme, can be passed on to build a
low-quality building in its place.
I have been arguing for ways in which taxation and regulation can be used to advance
the cause of sustainable cities. But governments themselves have direct control over
enormous purchasing power, which, if used in an enlightened way, could have a
hugely beneficial effect on the environment.
Consider the following paradox. In 1992, the US government purchased
approximately 135,000 passenger cars. At about the same time General Motors
exhibited a prototype electric car, which it announced would not be put into
production until annual sales of 100,000 could be guaranteed. The US still has no
electric car on the production line. Clearly the coordinated pledges of government
orders worldwide could see innovation in all areas of ecological design, from electric
cars to low-energy buildings. Governments, such large consumers, are in a position to
directly influence the market. Encouraging innovation in these areas would produce a
huge growth in technological development and employment.

6

For the last 25 years, France has used its public buildings budgets to improve the
quality of its buildings and its architectural profession, as well as to increase the
public awareness of environmental issues. Competition and innovation are at the heart
of this policy. Although we in Britain are perhaps only aware of the grands projets, in
France there is one competition for each and every government building, be it a public
housing project, a school, a post office, a local square or a new town. A local
competition of any significance will be decided by a jury comprised of the mayor,
representatives of the users and of the local community, technical experts and
architects. The major international competitions normally involve the president
himself. The French are aware that good architecture is much dependent on a
visionary and informed client as it is on a capable design team. The system is now
being extended to encourage ecological design. Government initiatives include
publication of work of promising young architects, lectures and exhibitions in
regional architectural centres. The system succeeds in giving young talent real
experience and in attracting international architects of quality to work in France.
This long-term policy has been tremendously successful. It has raised public
awareness of architectural issues and has led to countless good contemporary
buildings throughout the country. The French now have one of the most respected
architectural professions in the world with innovative young architects like Jean
Nouvel, Dominique Perrault and Christian de Portzamparc.
Contrast this with Britain. Here taxpayers spend 4bn pounds annually on their public
buildings and yet the Government has no architectural policy. In 1992, Britain held 10
public design competitions to France’s 2,000. Britons complain about their
architecture and yet we have a generation of talented young architects that - almost
without exception - have received no public work in this country.
It is truly maddening to watch real talent being squandered today and a mediocre
architectural heritage left for tomorrow. The Government is failing in its
responsibility as a patron. Architecture is the physical expression of a society’s
cultural development and social concerns. We should be going out of our way to
involve the citizen and raise the quality of the profession. We should be seeking out
the young, talented and imaginative, and getting them to work on our schools, public
housing and hospitals. One good public building can revitalise a whole
neighbourhood.
But a new opportunity is being presented by the Lottery and the Millennium Fund.
Much of this will be spent on public buildings - museums, theatres and sports centres.
This could spearhead the revitalisation of our cities and provide the opportunity for
the citizen to participate in the revival of British architecture. Government should step
in to establish a competition structure for these and all other public commissions.
Even the greatest society cannot rest on its past glory, but must continuously renew its
heritage.
We need to inform and involve citizens in the problems of their environment and their
city. The Victorians built public libraries. We should build architecture centres.
Citizens’ participation needs to be made informal and interesting. The architecture
centre is where the planning committee would meet in public. It would become the
focus for public debate on strategic plans, planning applications and competitions. It
7

would hold exhibitions, courses and debates about the city and its architecture. And at
the very heart of each centre should be adaptable working models of the city and the
neighbourhood.
As a society we remain incredibly blind to the impact that architecture and the design
of cities have on our lives. Education is fundamental to a far-reaching change in our
perception of the built environment. Cities are a great tool for education, yet they are
hardly surprising in the curriculum. Children should be introduced at school to the
issues raised by the buildings and cities in which they live. Sustainability should be at
the heart of many of the core subjects, a linking theme between biology, geography,
history, art and technology.
The policies that I have been advocating are easy to implement and could radically
transform the cities of this small planet. Equitable cities that are beautiful, safe and
exciting are quite within our grasp.
As I have been arguing throughout these lectures, our aim must be to search for a
dynamic equilibrium between society, cities and nature. The planet itself is perfectly
capable of sustaining humanity if humanity respects its dependence on nature. I
believe that with vigilance and popular determination the concept of sustainability
will grow in importance until it becomes the dominant philosophy of our age.

8

