REITH LECTURES 1995: Sustainable City
Richard Rogers
Lecture 1: The Culture of Cities
TRANSMISSION: 12 February 1995 – BBC Radio 4

In 1957 the first satellite was launched into space to take its place amongst the stars.
This signalled the birth of a new global consciousness, a dramatic change in our
relationship to our planet. It gave us a place from which we could look at ourselves.
From space, the beauty and fragility of the earth’s atmosphere, our primordial support
system are striking; but so, too, is humanity’s systematic plundering of every aspect
of our ecosystem. From space, we can see the scars of pollution, deforestation,
industry and urban sprawl. Above us, as I speak, the 400 or so satellites currently in
orbit witness and gage the global impact of a human population that has leapt from
1.5 to 5.5 billion in this century alone. Coldly they confirm the grim realities we all
experience in our daily lives as we step out into the city.
It is a shocking revelation - especially to me as an architect - that the world’s
environmental crisis is being driven by our cities. For the first time in history, half the
world’s population live in cities. In 1900 it was only one-tenth. In 30 years, it may be
as much as three-quarters. The urban population of the world is increasing at a rate of
a quarter of a million people per day - think of it as a new London every month.
The scale, and the rate of increase, of our consumption of resources, and the pollution
it inflicts, is catastrophic. Let me offer you three examples to make the point. First, we
take only 10 per cent of our energy from directly renewable and non-polluting
sources, such as sun, wind and water. Yet in a single year, we burn some one million
year’s worth of non-renewable fossil fuels - coal, oil, gas - and this is producing the
bulk of our pollution. Secondly, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has
warned that a global warming mainly produced by the burning of fossil fuels is likely
to cause a rise in temperature of three degrees centigrade by the end of the next
century. Such a temperature increase could melt the ice cap and raise sea levels,
enough to seriously threaten that half of the world’s population which lives beside
seas and rivers. My third example concerns the food chain. The World Resource
Institute in Washington estimates that over the past 50 years 10 per cent of the
vegetation-bearing surface of the earth has suffered moderate to extreme damage. In
Britain alone, over-intensive farming, especially the overuse of fertilisers, has put
more than a third of our soil at risk.
Human life has always depended on the three variables of population, resources, and
environment. But today, we are perhaps the first generation to face the simultaneous
impact of expanding populations, depletion of resources, and erosion of the
environment. All this is common knowledge and yet, incredibly, industrial expansion
carries on regardless.
Other societies have faced extinction; some, like the Easter Islanders of the Pacific,
the Harappa civilisation of the Indes Valley and the Teotihuacan of pre-Columbian
1

America, due to ecological disasters of their own making. Historically societies
unable to solve their environmental crisis have either migrated or become extinct. The
vital difference today is that the scale of our crisis is no longer regional, but global: it
involves all of humanity and the entire planet.
In these five lectures, I will also show that the same key trends that drive
environmental decline are generating disastrous social instability. I will argue that
social and environmental issues are interlocked, and that cities, which are now failing
to provide the most basic of needs of society, can provide a healthy and civilising
environment for our citizens. I passionately believe that the art of city building has
never been so crucial to our future.
My cause for optimism in the face of grim evidence comes from the growing
acceptance of ecological thought. Scientists, philosophers, economists, architects, and
artists, often working with local communities, are now using a global perspective to
explore strategies to sustain our future.
The United Nations report “Our Common Future”, laid down the concept of
sustainable development as the backbone of a global economic policy; its aim that we
should meet our present needs without compromising future generations, and that we
should positively direct our development in favour of the world’s majority: the poor.
At the core of this concept is a new notion of wealth. This incorporates those
environmental elements previously considered limitless and free - clean air, fresh
water, an effective ozone layer, and a fertile land and sea. The means proposed to
protect the environment were stringent regulations and a costing of the market’s use
of natural resources: regulations - you don’t use CFCs; costs - you pay for the damage
your use of resources create. For example, by placing a tax on the use of coal or
petrol, we both reflect the damage from acid rain and carbon dioxide and encourage
the switch to renewable energies. The ultimate aim of sustainable economic
development is to leave to future generations a stock of environmental wealth or
national capital that equals or exceeds our own inheritance.
I will argue that nowhere is this sort of implementation of sustainability more relevant
than in the city. In fact, I believe environmental “sustainability” needs to become the
guiding law of modern urban design - an innovation that would have an impact on the
21st century city as radical as that of the industrial revolution on its 19th century
counterpart.
As it stands, cities and buildings are the most important destroyers of the ecosystem.
In London, for example, massive traffic congestion causes more air pollution today
than there was before the Clean Air Act banned the burning of coal in 1956. Foul air
is blamed for the fact that one in seven city children in Britain now suffer from
asthma.
In the United States, pollution rising from the cities has reduced crop production by 5
to 10 per cent. In Japan, Tokyo alone dumps an estimated 20 million tonnes of waste
every year. The city has already saturated its bay with waste, and is now running out
of sites on land. But although cities are breeding environmental disaster, there is
nothing in the nature of city living that makes this inevitable. On the contrary, I
believe that cities can be transformed into the most environmentally balanced form of
2

modern settlement. In future lectures, I shall talk about how cities, and city living, can
be designed to be more efficient and environmentally sustainable.
I have been focusing on the need for environmental reform, but I also want to stress
that social aspects of city life are vital to a city’s sustainability. We have to define
sustainability in social and cultural terms, as well as environmental and economic
ones. Poverty, unemployment, ill health, poor education - in short social injustice - all
undermine a city’s capacity to carry out these policies. An urban society in conflict, as
in Grozny, or suffering severe poverty, as in Mexico City, or with large sections of the
community alienated from mainstream life, as in Los Angeles, is unlikely to be
persuaded about the importance of preserving natural resources, of switching to public
transport. It is only if our cities offer a vibrant, healthy and secure urban life that we
can dissuade people from fleeing to the suburbs.
Cities have grown and changed so much that it is hard to remember that they exist
first and foremost for people. They are the cradle of civilisation, a place for societies
to come together and exchange ideas. Cities concentrate physical, intellectual and
creative energy. It is this social and cultural dynamic rather than an aesthetic balance
created by the design of buildings that to my mind is the essence of civic beauty.
I am passionate about the choice and diversity of city life - from exhibitions to
demonstrations, from bars to cathedrals, and from shops to opera. I love the
combination of ages, races, cultures, and activities, the mix of community with
anonymity, familiarity and surprise - even the sense of dangerous excitement they can
generate. I enjoy the animation that pavement cafes bring to the street, the informal
liveliness of the public square, the mixture of shops, offices and homes, that makes a
living neighbourhood. Strolling through Europe’s great public spaces - the covered
Galleria in Milan, the Ramblas in Barcelona, or the parks of London, I feel part of the
community of that city. The Italians even have a special word to describe the way
men, women and children come out in the evening and stroll in the squares and
streets, to see and be seen. They call it La Passeggiata.
One of the exhilarating moments of my career was when the Parisian authorities
agreed to give half the site they had set aside for the Pompidou Centre to a public
piazza. In the back of our minds, when we were planning how the centre could
invigorate its surrounding streets and communities, was the bustling public square at
the heart of Siena, scene of the great Palio horse race which thunders over its cobbles
twice a year. Today, to my great delight, the Place Beaubourg and the Pompidou
Centre teem with life, and this has led to a wholesale renewal of the area around it.
I have been talking about the importance of a vibrant urban life - to my mind, the
essential ingredient of a good city. And yet today this quality is increasingly missing.
The public life of a city is enacted in its streets, squares, alleys and parks, and it is
these spaces that make up the public domain.
This domain is an institution in its own right. It belongs to the community and, like
any institution, it can enhance or frustrate our existence. But just ask anybody what
they think of city life today. He or she will be more likely talk about congestion,
pollution and fear of crime, than community, animation, or beauty. In all probability,
a negative association will be made between city and quality of living.

3

The essential problem is that cities have been viewed in instrumental or consumerist
terms. Those responsible for them have tended to see it as their role to design cities to
meet private material needs, rather than to foster public life. The result is that cities
have been polarised into communities of rich and poor and segregated into ghettoes of
single-minded activity: the business park, the housing estate, the residential suburb or, worse still - into giant, single-function buildings like shopping centres with their
own private streets, which lead nowhere built in.
The central distinction here is between what American political theorist Michael
Walzer has called “single-minded” and “open-minded” spaces. The first is designed
by planners and developers with only one purpose in view. The second caters for a
variety of uses in which everyone can participate. The residential suburb, the housing
estate, the business district and industrial zone, the car-park, underpass, ring road,
supermarket, and shopping mall are all “single-minded spaces”. The car is more
single-minded than the train; the cinema is more single-minded than the museum; the
fast-food restaurant is more single-minded than the pub. But the busy square, the
lively street, the market, the park, the pavement cafe, are “open-minded”. In the first
set of spaces, we are generally in a hurry; but in “open-minded” places, we are readier
to meet people’s gaze, to talk and to be waylaid.
Both types of space have a role to play in the city. Single-minded spaces cater to our
very modern craving for private consumption, for autonomy, and intimacy. They are,
admittedly, very efficient. By contrast, “open-minded places” give us something in
common: they bring diverse sections of society together, and breed a sense of
tolerance, identity, and mutual respect.
My point, however, is that we have seen the first eclipsing the second. “Openmindedness” has given way to “single-mindedness”. We are witnessing the
destruction of the very idea of the city. The emphasis is now on selfishness and
separation rather than on contact and community. Businesses have been isolated and
turned into commercial centres or business parks; shops into shopping centres, homes
into residential suburbs and housing estates. The inevitable outcome is that streets,
squares and other components of the public domain lose the very diversity that creates
their animation. They become little more than functional spaces, highways for
scurrying pedestrians or sealed private cars. I find it hard to believe that anyone would
really be happy living in a city devoid of public life. Today’s men and women may
place a special value on privacy, but they also long for public life. The popularity of
football matches and concerts, the dramatic increase of people going to museums, the
crowds that pack Soho on a Friday and Saturday night all testify to this. If anything,
we face the challenge of creating for the first time in history a truly inclusive,
democratic public domain. The absence of vibrant public spaces has dire social
consequences. From Buenos Aires to Beijing, from Houston to Calcutta, we are
launching cities on a spiral of decline. As cities becoming divided into ghettoes of
activity, the spaces between them become increasingly soulless and cities themselves
become less hospitable and more alienating. At some point in the spiralling descent, a
new element enters: fear. As public spaces decline, we lose the natural policing of
streets that comes from the very presence of people. Spaces in cities become
territorial. Now they are perceived not merely as inhospitable but as positively
dangerous. Gradually the semi-public spaces that once overlapped and enriched the
public domain are privatised. The market becomes a shopping mall, the open
4

university becomes a closed campus, and as this process spreads through the city, the
public domain retreats. People who can afford it move out of the city or bar
themselves in. Ultimately the city becomes a two-tier affair with the wealthy rushing
from one protective enclave to another, and the poor trapped in inner city ghettos or as in the growing cities of the developing world - in squalid shantytowns. We created
cities to celebrate what we have in common. Now they are designed to keep us apart.
It is in the sprawling cities of the United States - with their ghettos, heavily policed
middle-class dormitories, shopping centres and business parks - that the tendencies I
have identified can most clearly be seen.
In its time Los Angeles has inspired as much enthusiasm as any city on Earth. But the
Californian writer Mike Davis has described how Los Angeles, the site of major riots,
has grown more and more segregated and militarised. Starting at the outskirts, there is
the Toxic Rim - a circle of giant garbage landfills, radioactive waste dumps and
polluting industries. Moving inwards, you pass so-called “gated” or privately
patrolled residential suburbs and a zone of self-policing lower middle-class homes,
until you reach a “free-fire” downtown area of ghettos and gangs. Here, the Ramparts
Division of Los Angeles Police regularly investigate more murders than any other
local police department in the country. Finally, beyond this “no-go area” lies the
business district itself. In parts of this area, TV cameras and security devices screen
almost every passing pedestrian. At the touch of a button, access is blocked, bulletproof screens are activated, bomb-proof shutters roll down. The appearance of the
“wrong sort of person” triggers a quiet panic: video cameras turn on their mounts,
security guards adjust their belts. A new type of citadel has emerged, which relies not
only on physical boundaries, high fences, barbed wire and imposing gates, but
increasingly on invisible, electronic hardware.
And if Los Angeles has emerged as a modern fortress city, developments in Houston
are almost as disturbing. An entire underground system, over six miles of passageway
in all, has been dug beneath the city’s downtown business area. This glitzy network,
called with unintended irony “the connection system”, is entirely private. You cannot
gain admittance from the street, but only from the marbled lobbies of banks and oil
companies that dominate Houston. The result is the establishment of another form of
urban ghetto. The car-dominated streets are left to the poor, mainly unemployed,
while wealthy workers shop and do business in air-conditioned comfort and security.
Of course our own cities are not yet like this, but many display the same
characteristics writ small. We, too, have seen a retreat from the city and growing
inner-city poverty, an increasing reliance on private security and private transport, the
proliferation of one-dimensional spaces, and the explosion of riots. What I have been
describing reflects the fundamental dichotomy of the city: its potential to civilise and
its potential to brutalise.
But if we lament the recent transformation of our cities, we should acknowledge that
cities can only reflect the values and character of the societies they contain. This
relationship is well explored in the long tradition of attempts to make cities reflect
society’s ideals. Vitruvius, Leonardo da Vinci, Thomas Jefferson, Ebenezer Howard,
Le Corbusier, Buckminster Fuller and others have proposed ideal urban forms to
propel society through its traumas.

5

These architectural and social utopias exert a constant and profound influence on our
great architects and patrons, and filter through to developers and city builders. In a
democratic age, you might expect contemporary architecture to express democratic
ideals and egalitarian values.
But recent transformations of cities reflect the workings of business committed to
short-term profit, where the pursuit of wealth has become an end in itself, rather than
a means to achieve broader goals. City planning world-wide is dominated by market
forces, and short-term financial imperatives - an approach most spectacularly
illustrated by the chaotic and office-dominated development on the Isle of Dogs in
London. Not only have such developments eliminated variety of function from our
city centres, but in this single-minded search for profit, we have ignored the needs of
the wider community.
But if, as I have claimed, cities are where life is often at its most precarious, they are
also where we have the greatest tangible opportunity for improvement, intervention
and change.
I have been arguing that tenancies within our cities are working to undermine both the
environment and their own social life. Putting cities back on the political agenda is
now fundamental. What is needed is greater emphasis on citizens’ participation in city
design and planning. We must put communal objectives centre-stage. And should
people doubt the possibility of regaining democratic control of their cities, examples
from around the world prove them wrong. There are many countries where urbanism
and architecture, in particular, are established public issues, and these provide a sharp
contrast to recent British experience. In France, for example, President Mitterrand has
stated that “culture” - and first of all architecture - is the fourth highest voting issue. I
dread to imagine where our politicians would rank culture.
Educating our children is a necessary first step towards involving communities in
decision-making. It is on this that we must focus our National Curriculum. Teaching
children about biology and history, but not about their actual environment - the built
one - leaves them ill-equipped to participate in the process of respecting and
improving the city that so critically affects their lives. We must teach citizenship and
listen to citizens. So much of our future and our quality of life depends on getting this
right.
Any type of close citizen involvement in city design requires us to make funds
available to interest and inform the public. San Francisco has gone further and
integrated the whole concept of public participation in urban planning into their
electoral system. In local elections, you do not just choose a candidate, you have the
opportunity to decide your own surroundings. How much office space should be
allowed? Which dockside plan is the best?
Curitiba in Brazil has proved to be an object lesson for even the most deprived
communities. Visionary leadership and open participation have transformed a once
desolate shantytown into a thriving, self-reliant and expanding community with parks,
public transport, and good sanitation.

6

Finally, closer to home, Rotterdam is a good example of government-sponsored but
community-led development. Here, much of the land is publicly-owned and can be
given to the community when and where the need arises rather than when someone
can afford to buy a site. The city grows in cell-like fashion, splitting and replicating
into coherent neighbourhoods of between three to five thousand people, rather than
sprawling and dividing into dormitory and work zones.
The approaches pursued in San Francisco, Curitiba or Rotterdam must not be taken as
blueprints. In fact they illustrate how each city has evolved public administrations
tailored to the culture and problems that its own communities face. What they do
prove is that we can transform the fabric and environment of our cities through
greater, genuine, public participation and committed government initiative.
Throughout this lecture, I have emphasised the social problems and ecological crisis
that contemporary cities and technologies are generating, but the answer to our
problems lies not in turning our backs on technology but in embracing its pursuits and
development.
Humankind’s capacity to learn and to transmit accumulated knowledge from
generation to generation, to anticipate and to solve problems is its greatest asset. I find
it amazing that only 70 70-year lifespans separate our own epoch, which has the
ability to build a city in space, from the first mud cities along the Euphrates. It is the
irrepressible power of the mind that has accelerated the development of our species.
Knowledge, technology and our capacity for forethought has transformed our world,
and often in the face of our own pessimism.
In 1798, the economist Malthus warned the world that the rate of population growth
“is infinitely greater than the power of the earth to feed future generations”. If he was
proved wrong, as he was in the case of Britain, it was because he had not foreseen the
remarkable capacity of technology. In the 100 years following his ominous prediction,
the population of Britain quadrupled, but technological advances brought a 14-fold
increase in agricultural production. The prospects that technology now offers are
greater still. Only two 70-year lifespans separate the invention of the bicycle from the
sinister perfection of the Stealth bomber. Less than one lifespan separates the first
electronic computer from the uncharted horizons of the information superhighway.
The problem is not with technology, but with its application. Today technology
destabilises and transforms the modern age - as Marx famously said, “All that is solid
melts into air”. Caught in this endless upheaval, technology can be used to positive
ends to advance social justice - one of modernity’s greatest ideals. Perhaps we can say
that when technology is used to secure the fundamentally modern principles of
universal human rights - for shelter, food, health care, education and freedom - the
modern age attains its full potential. It is here that the spirit of modernity finds its very
expression.
The challenge we face today is to break with a system which treats technology and
finance as a route to short-term profit rather than as a means to social and
environmental ends. The urban planner who drives a motorway through the middle of
a city merely to advance a single-minded goal of mobility employs technology for the
wrong ends. So, too, do those developers and architects who design the largest,
cheapest and most profitable building with no regard for a city’s public life or
7

environment. I am wild about science, not about science run wild. And that thought, I
suppose, is at the heart of my concept of sustainability: the critical application of
creative thinking and technology to secure our future on this small planet.

8

