REITH LECTURES 1995: Sustainable City
Richard Rogers
Lecture 2: Sustainable Cities
TRANSMISSION: 19 February 1995 – BBC Radio 4

In the 40 years up to 1990, the population of the world’s cities increased tenfold,
soaring from 200 million to over 2 billion. Cities now contain half of the world’s
population, but cause at least three quarters of its pollution.
As I argued in my opening lecture, they are undermining the planet’s ecosystem.
Cities have become socially divisive and environmentally hazardous. And if we in
Britain think that our problems of pollution, congestion and inner-city decay are
appalling, then consider the changes that are overwhelming the cities of the
developing world.
In 1990, there were 35 cities with populations over 5 million; 22 of them were in the
developing world. By the year 2000 the figure will be 44. Two billion people are
expected to be added to the cities of the developing world within 30 years. Whilst our
cities are stagnating, in the developing world urban population explosion and
migration from the countryside are expanding their cities at a terrifying rate. Their
presence will cause an exponential growth in the volume of resources consumed and
of pollution created. Yet at least half of this urban population will be living in
shantytowns with no running water, no electricity, no sanitation and little hope.
Mexico City has the dubious distinction of being the largest and most polluted city in
the world. Its population in 1900 was 340,000, the size of Croydon’s. It is now the
industrial core of Mexico and home to over 20 million people and 4 million cars.
Visitors often think they are flying into a rainstorm when, in fact, the city is covered
in a layer of smog. The smog is four times worse than in Los Angeles and six times
higher than the standard set by the World Health Organisation. The ozone count
exceeds the danger level for more than 300 days a year; and when pollution is too
intense, industrial production is halted and the public urged to stay indoors.
In this lecture, I want to focus on tackling problems. Our goal must be to make cities
around the world sustainable, cities that offer opportunity today without jeopardising
future generations. The greatest offenders are those of us who live in the developed
world. We make up only one-fifth of the global population, but are causing at least
three quarters of its pollution. This wholly disproportionate consumption of resources
places a special responsibility on us, both to make our cities sustainable and to help
the sprawling megacities of the developing world cope with the astounding growth.
Last week I stressed that cities face a daunting range of social problems - how the
erosion of community life, the segregation of our everyday activities has launched
cities on a downward spiral dividing communities, creating ghettos and wrecking
lives. But the central theme of these lectures is that social and environmental issues
are not distinct. Strategies to improve the sustainability of our environment will
1

transform the social life of our cities. The two goals - ecological and social - are not
just compatible; they are mutually reinforcing. Sustainability means healthier, livelier,
more open-minded cities. And, above all, it means life for future generations. The key
to making cities more sustainable lies, in my view, in reinterpreting, re-inventing the
dense and diverse urban city, the compact city of overlapping activity.
Here it is worth remembering the historical problems of dense cities. The industrial
cities of the 19th century were hell. They suffered extremes of over-crowding, poverty
and ill-health. Stinking open sewers spread cholera and typhoid. Life expectancy in
many English cities was less than 20 years. Toxic industries stood side by side with
overflowing tenements. Coal and wood fires belched out deadly fumes. It was
precisely these inequities and hazards that led planners like Ebenezeer Howard, in
1898, or Patrick Abercrombie, in 1944, to propose decanting populations into less
dense and greener surroundings - Garden Cities and New Towns.
Today, heavy industry is disappearing from developed cities. Coal-burning is
banished. At least in theory, with the state-of-the-art public transport systems and
virtually clean power generation available, the dense city is no longer a health hazard.
And this means we can reconsider the case for close-proximity living, rediscover the
advantages of living within each other’s company. Beyond the social opportunity, the
dense city can bring major ecological benefits because, as I will show later, it can be
designed to double the efficiency of energy use, consume fewer resources, safeguard
the countryside and produce less pollution. It is for these reasons that I believe we
should be reinvesting in the idea of a dense and socially diverse city - shaping cities
into compact forms and focusing communities around neighbourhoods. But today, the
dominant urban model is a cliché of the North American city - with its downtown
office zones, out-of-town shopping malls, housing ghettos and residential suburbs, all
linked by polluting and socially divisive highways.
Several causes are driving the expansion of the city and the segregation of its
activities. Chief amongst these are economic expediency and the impact of the car.
Even on the small scale, developers - both public and private - are turning their backs
on mixed-use buildings. These traditional buildings, found in cities like Vienna and
Madrid, in which studios sit over family homes, which sit over offices, which sit over
shops, bring life to their streets and reduce the need to drive for every daily need. But
these mixed use buildings also create complex tenancies which local authorities find
hard to manage and developers hard to sell. Instead both prefer big open sites or cheap
green fields where they can construct whole housing estates or business parks, with
minimal planning restrictions and maximum standardisation.
The search for short-term profit and fast results has turned investment away from
mixed urban neighbourhoods, but it is the car which is undermining the fabric of the
city, letting the city sprawl. Just as the elevator made the skyscraper possible, so the
car has enabled citizens to drive away from polluted city centres. The car has made
viable the whole concept of dividing our everyday activities into compartments segregated zones of offices, shops and homes. And the wider our cities spread out, the
more it becomes uneconomic to expand public transport systems, and the less they
can offer an adequate alternative to driving.

2

The car is perhaps the century’s most liberating and most desired technological
product. To the individual, it is cheap, practical and promises freedom and status. But
in most cities of the world, it is cars that are now generating the bulk of air pollution the very same pollution that city dwellers are fleeing. Between 1970 and 1995 car
ownership in Europe alone more than doubled. It is continuing to increase in
developed cities, and is about to soar in developing ones. Simple logistics show how
increasing car ownership transforms the city. First public space is taken over by
parked cars. An efficient parking standard requires 20 square metres for a single car.
Suppose that only one in 10 citizens owns a car. Then in a city of 10 million, you need
an area about five times the size of the City of London, just to park cars. But start up
those million cars, and drive off, and you saturate the city with pollution and
congestion and harass and divide communities in the process.
Just the anticipation of high levels of car use has made city planners design new cities
around road specification, ignoring most other human needs. And, as I will show
later, planners around the world who know that car ownership is increasing feel they
must perpetuate the spiral - a spiral encouraged by governments wedded to
nationalised and privatised car industries. Fortunately the hidden cost of the
segregated lifestyle are beginning to be recognised, even by those who have escaped
the inner city. In the United States, the economic cost alone of traffic congestion
purely in squandered energy and lost time is about 150 billion dollars per year, the
gross national product of Denmark wasted, and this figure does not begin to address
the cost of the natural environment to human health, nor to wildlife. And worst
affected are the poor: isolated, unemployed and, thus, disenfranchised. They are left
scratching a living in the rotting city ghettos of our developed cities, or in the huge
mushrooming shantytowns of developing ones.
Many cities are grappling with their problems. There are positive examples from
around the world of actions that have been taken to remodel the city. But when we are
faced with designing a new community in its entirety, then we must aim at creating an
environment which combines both the social and environmental advantages that I
have claimed a sustainable approach can offer. This new form of dense and diverse
city is what I will call the Compact City. A fundamental benefit of the compact
approach is that the countryside is protected from the encroachment of urban
development. For the citizen, the compactness is enhanced by a network of open
public spaces and parks. The Compact City grows around a number of centres of
social and commercial activity. These are the focus around which communities
develop into neighbourhoods. London’s historic structure of towns, villages and parks
is typical of this polycentric pattern.
In the Compact City, these neighbourhoods, with their parks and public spaces,
combine a diversity of private activities with public services and facilities, including
education and transport. Most importantly, they bring local work opportunities within
convenient reach of the community. This proximity means less driving around for
everyday needs, and makes trams, light rail, electric buses, cycling and walking more
pleasant and more effective. It obviously reduces congestion and pollution from cars,
whilst increasing conviviality and restoring the natural policing of streets by the
greater presence of people.

3

On a broader scale, metropolitan public transport systems can provide high-speed
cross-town travel by linking one neighbourhood centre to another, leaving local
distribution to local systems. This would also reduce the impact of through-traffic,
which should be calmed and controlled, especially around the public heart of
neighbourhoods. Proximity and its consequent reduction in congestion, the presence
of landscape and the exploitation of new urban technologies can radically improve air
quality in the city. The concentration of buildings can make for more efficient
distribution and recycling of power.
Sustainable cities of this sort could, I contend, reassert the city as the physical
embodiment of a community-based society. It is a type of urban structure that can be
interpreted in all manner of ways. Cities are about people, about face to face contact
and the expression of local culture. Whether the climate is hot or cold, the community
rich or poor, the long-term aim of sustainable development is to create a flexible
structure for a vigorous community with a healthy and non-polluting environment.
In 1991 the Mayor of Shanghai invited my practice to propose a strategic framework
for a new district. This offered us the chance to explore and apply the principles of the
sustainable Compact City. China’s one and a half billion people may have about one
quarter of the world’s population. China is undergoing the largest migration in its
history from country to city, a journey that has seen 80 million people moving into
shanties around China’s main cities.
Traditionally the Chinese viewed cities and their agricultural hinterland as a totality.
Even today Shanghai is nearly self-sufficient in vegetables and grain. But in the rush
to industrialise and urbanise, the ecology has suffered. Five of the world’s 10 most
air-polluted cities are in China, four of China’s seven most important river systems
are contaminated, and acid rain affects almost a third of China’s territory.
New cities are flattening colossal tracts of countryside either to supply construction or
simply to make way for new developments. In 1990 Shanghai, the world’s fifth
largest city, had a population of 13 million. In five years it will have more than 17
million. The city’s ambition is to consolidate its role as the commercial hub of China
and a major force in world finance. Sadly instead of improving the existing transport
system, the city intends to follow the Western model and motorise the 7 million
cyclists who fill the already crowded streets.
Shanghai is a stunning city, dense and teeming with life. Early 20th century buildings
face onto the famous tree-lined riverside of the Bund - a waterfront to rival the
elegance of the Promenade des Anglais in Nice or the power of Liverpool’s great
Merseyside frontage. But now the Bund is the first tragic casualty in Shanghai’s drive
to convert to the car. As I watched the majestic lines of trees being felled to make way
for continuous riverside car park, I was filled with foreboding for this magnificent
city.
The river itself, the Huangpo, is almost a kilometre wide and is crisscrossed by
merchant shipping of every shape and size. Across the river lies the Pudong, a vast
development area covering thousands of hectares. And in the Pudong, immediately
opposite the heart of old Shanghai, lies the site of the new district - a teardrop shaped
area, 1km square, remarkably similar to London’s Isle of Dogs. It is here that the
4

Pudong has only recently been linked to old Shanghai by two of the world’s longest
single-span bridges as well as by a network of tunnels. Intended as a pure office
development for half a million workers, the new district was seen as a Canary Wharf
project but many times larger.
The scheme proposed by the Shanghai authorities turned its back on the cultural and
commercial diversity of the old city. Instead the new district was dedicated to
international office users and planned around the car. Local traffic engineers designed
for intense rush hours that required massive roads, sometimes double and tripledecked, and a network of pedestrian underpasses and bridges. So dominant were the
roads that barely one-third of the site was left for buildings - an average road coverage
three times greater than New York with less than half as much building. With each
building isolated by highways, the result would be a district of stand-alone individual
skyscrapers surrounded by a sea of cars: for some the ultimate image of the modern
international city, but socially and environmentally unsustainable in every aspect of
its design.
By contrast, our approach was to design not a financial ghetto detached from the life
of the city, but a lively, commercial and residential quarter capable of acting as a
focus for the whole Pudong. This approach also safeguards against the boom-bust
cycle of the international office market, which has bankrupted single-function
developments such as Canary Wharf. Above all, we aimed to establish a sustainable
community which could halve the energy consumption of a conventional development
and limit its impact on the environment.
Our transport engineers calculated that a broader mix of activities and a greater
emphasis on public transport could reduce the space filled by roads by as much as 60
per cent and dramatically reduce air pollution. Now we were able to transform singleuse roads into multi-use public space. We vastly expanded the network of pedestrianbiased streets, cycle paths, market places, and avenues, and made room for a
substantial park. These public spaces were carefully linked to the transport system,
making a single interconnected web of movement that started at the citizen’s front
door and linked to buses, car parks, trams, and ultimately to stations and airports - the
hierarchy of movement from walking to high-speed trains and planes. The overall aim
was to locate the community’s everyday needs including public transport within
comfortable walking distance and away from through-traffic.

New neighbourhoods were focused on the six main transport interchanges and woven
into the public domain. Each had a distinct character and all lay within 10 to 15
minutes’ walk of the central park. Concentrations of offices and shops were located
closer to the busy metropolitan underground stations whilst residential buildings were
mainly clustered around the park and by the river, together with hospitals, schools and
other community based functions.
With fewer roads to isolate the buildings, they could be joined together to form streets
and squares. By varying the heights of buildings we could optimise the daylight they
received and focus sunlight into the street, squares and avenues. This gave us a city
profile that was crowned by a series of towers - a striking skyline across the river
from old Shanghai.

5

I have described how a Compact City made up of balanced and diverse communities
can give cars a smaller role and reduce the energy consumed by transportation. There
are also other environmental advantages of the Compact City. A Compact City
reduces waste. Power generation systems produce hot water as a by product which in
conventional systems is simply thrown away. Combined heat and power plants, called
CHPs, can be used to distribute electricity. Their proximity enables them to pipe hot
water directly into buildings. This process can more than double the efficiency of
conventional urban power distribution. Even urban trash, usually either dumped or
incinerated, both with polluting effects, can be burned by local CHPs to supply some
30 per cent of the community’s energy needs. A city that combines a varied mix of
activity also makes it easier to transfer waste heat from one activity to another. Excess
heat generated by offices, for example, is wholly dissipated into the environment, but
it can be reused in hospitals, homes, hotels or schools if those are within reasonable
proximity. Even the huge quantities of human waste and dirty water that cities
discharge can be recycled to produce methane fuel or reused to water and fertilise
crops.
Although we began the Shanghai project with a target of reducing overall energy use
by half, we were amazed to calculate that the combined savings meant a full 70 per
cent reduction. Good news for the environment, but also a dramatic decrease in the
cost of living for businesses and residents.
I want to stress that the Pudong project is a local illustration of a sustainable approach
to urban planning, not a new urban blueprint. The distinction is crucial. Settlements
from rural hamlets to the largest metropolis, from those with vast resources to those
with precious few all have something to gain from this approach. Smaller towns, for
instance, make ideal sustainable developments and offer the possibility of integrating
both urban and rural strategies.
Last year we were commissioned to plan a model sustainable settlement for 4,000
inhabitants in the hills of Mallorca. Our first step was to consider how to resolve the
most obvious problem to make this arid land self-sufficient in water. Our
environmental consultants calculated that by collecting only 10 per cent of the annual
rainfall on the surrounding landscape, we could supply the villages and irrigate local
crops. We proposed to structure the community into three linked villages that were
carved into the parched hills. A new urban water network provided domestic water
and fed a system of fountains, troughs and ponds which cooled the streets and squares
and irrigated trees and plants. The runoff water and dirty water from the villages
combined to feed the surrounding farmlands, which improved irrigation and greatly
increased the diversity and volume of crop production. We concentrated on existing
and available sources of renewable energy, including wind, sun and energy crops such
as willows. These were grown and burned in local CHPs to produce power for the
area. This boosted employment in local agriculture and closed the circle between the
production of carbon dioxide when generating power and its absorption by new
planting - an efficient use of energy renewed through photosynthesis. Here we used
local materials and local skills to construct buildings. These buildings were laid out,
so they would make full use of the elements to cool and protect the streets and
courtyards, a process of shaping construction to optimise every environmental
condition. In general, the development sought to make maximum use of all local
resources and, in particular, labour - to create a low-cost and cheap to run settlement
6

which could underpin a healthy and sociable lifestyle for the community. And at this
scale sustainable development in many ways mirrors the approach which shaped
traditional settlements from desert towns to mountain villages.
But these sustainable approaches can also be applied to urban renewal. Most cities of
the developed world have suffered intense deindustrialisation over the past 20 years,
leaving a legacy of unemployment and fast abandoned sites. Much of this land is in or
very close to the centres of cities and offers tremendous possibilities for sustainable
developments.
But for a huge number of the world’s new urban dwellers, their first and usually only
experience of modern city life is the shantytown: shanty settlements, which are
normally illegal, in some cases house as many as three quarters of a city’s population
and yet these slums like even the most rudimentary services like drainage, electricity
and clean water. In Bombay 5 million people - the population of inner London - are
shanty dwellers. In Argentina, they are known as villas miserias, “townships of
misery”. Overall it is estimated that more than half of the urban population of the
developing world live in some form of shantytown. Alarmingly pressures from
political instability to deforestation continue to cause migration to cities even when
there is no commercial base to support the new arrivals.
Yet, in a few rare cases, shanty settlements have displayed enough social
cohesiveness and resourcefulness to create viable low-cost towns. In the absence of a
fairer distribution of wealth, it is now widely accepted that the best way of helping
squatter settlements is to encourage self-help and to provide vision and technical
support. Here sustainable urban development can be a life saver.
Success stories are appearing. Curitiba, in south-east Brazil, was once a shantytown
wasteland that has now become a vibrant city with over 2 million residents. It has
made self-reliance the spirit of its daily life and environmental sustainability its top
priority. Recycling has become an integral part of the Curitiban lifestyle with parks lit
by lamps made from Fanta bottles, and domestic garbage handed in to central refuse
yards in exchange for fresh vegetables. Where the town was once strewn with
festering garbage, now it is planned around a network of parks and squares. Twenty
years ago Curitiba had half a square metre of open space per citizen; today it has 100
times more. So impressive are many of its public service initiatives that other cities
are now paying serious attention. New York, for example, is already investigating
ways of adopting its speedy line bus system. Curitiba’s community-led initiatives
inspire an extraordinary pride of place and provide an incentive for further action.
Clearly the extraordinary problems that shantytowns face must be primarily tackled
from within the community.
In places such as South Africa where new housing is now a political priority, the
question of how to produce it - and in what form - is crucial. The methods that
integrate communities into creating a healthy, cost-effective and sustainable urban
way of life are also the solutions to improving their livelihood. Participation is the key
to channelling local labour into providing resources that can transform lives.
At the start of this lecture I discussed some of the factors responsible for the sharply
declining quality of city life. The forces that are driving this decline can be realigned
7

towards sustainable and equitable objectives if society pursues environmental
policies, regulations and taxes to deter and dissuade cities from further destruction of
the environment.
Cities have become parasitic additions to the landscape - huge organisms draining the
world for their sustenance; relentless consumers, relentless polluters. But I hope that
the examples I have used, versions of the sustainable approach to city building, show
how feasible it is to redress this folly. In the beginning we built cities to overcome our
environment. In the future we must build cities to nurture it.

8

