REITH LECTURES 1996: The Language Web
Jean Aitchison
Lecture 1: A Web of Worries
TRANSMISSION: 6

February 1996 – BBC Radio 4

Is our language sick? You might think so, judging from complaints in newspapers:
“The standard of speech and pronunciation in England has declined so much . . . that
one is almost ashamed to let foreigners hear it.” “The language the world is crying out
to learn is diseased in its own country.” “We are plagued with idiots on radio and
television who speak English like the dregs of humanity, to the detriment of our
children.”
But why? At a time when English is a major world language, is it really in need of
hospital treatment? A wide web of worries; a cobweb of old ideas ensnares people as
they think about language - any language, and this must be swept away. But clearing
the cobwebs is only the first stage. The Language Web is the title of all these lectures.
Webs, especially cobwebs, may entangle. But webs themselves are not a tangle. They
have a preordained overall pattern, though every one is different in its details. Nature
forces humans to weave the language web in a particular way, whatever language they
speak. We are free only within a preset framework, so liberty within limits will be a
major theme. I will be looking at some key topics: how language changes, how it
began, how children learn it, and how we remember words.
But first, the cobweb of worries must be removed. This envelops all of language,
though especially language change. Yet humpbacked whales alter their songs every
year and no-one has complained.
Naturally language changes all the time; this is a fact of life. In the 14th century,
Geoffrey Chaucer noted that: “in forme of speche is chaunge” (language changes),
and the same is true today. But change is one thing; decay is another. Is British
English really changing for the worse, as some people argue?
Of course it isn’t. Over 100 years ago, linguists - people who work on language realised that different styles suit different occasions, but that no part of language is
ever deformed or bad. People who dispute this are like cranks who argue that the
world is flat. Yet flatter views about language are still widespread. As the Swiss
linguist Ferdinand de Saussure said over 75 years ago: “No other subject has spawned
more absurd ideas, more prejudices, more illusions or more myths”. Things haven’t
changed very much since then. On inspection, the web of worries surrounding change
turns out to be largely traditional, somewhat like the worries that each new generation
of parents has about its offspring. Laments about language go back for centuries.
A 14th century monk complained that the English practised strange stammering,
chattering, snarling and grating tooth-gnashing: “strange wlaffyng, chytering, harryng,
and garryng grisbittyng”. And the complaints continued. “Tongues, like governments,

1

have a natural tendency to degeneration,” wrote the lexicographer Samuel Johnson, in
the preface to his famous Dictionary of the English Language published in 1755.
Eighteenth century worries are perhaps understandable. Around 1700, the seemingly
fixed grammar of Latin aroused great admiration, at a time when English itself was in
a fairly fluid state. Many people hoped to lay down similar firm precepts for English,
and assumed that somebody, somewhere, knew what “correct” English was. Jonathan
Swift wrote a famous letter to the Lord Treasurer in 1712 urging the formation of an
academy to regulate language usage. He complained that many “gross improprieties”
could be found in the language of even the “best authors”. But “correct English” was
as hard to define then as it is now. In practice upper and middle class speech was
often praised as “good”, artificially supplemented by precepts from logic and
imitations of various Latin usages. These invented rules often get confused with
genuine language rules.
All languages have their own “rules” in the sense of recurring subconscious patterns.
In English, we usually place the verb inside the sentence, and say: “The spider caught
the fly”. In Welsh, the verb comes first: “Caught the spider the fly”, and in Turkish it
comes last, “The spider the fly caught” or “A bottle of good wine I want”. Without
these genuine rules, communication would break down. “Henry ate an octopus” does
not mean the same as “An octopus ate Henry”.
But genuine “rules” or “patterns” need to be distinguished from artificially imposed
ones. For example, an old and illogical belief that logic should govern language has
led in English to a ban on the double negative, as in “I don’t know nothing”, which is
now standardly: “I don’t know anything”. This is odd, because in most languages of
the world, the more negatives, the stronger the negation.
This was true in 13th century English. Chaucer in The Canterbury Tales said of the
courteous knight roughly: “He never said no bad thing to nobody”. In Chaucer’s
words:
He nevere yet no vileyene ne sayde
In all his lyf unto no maner wight
He was a verray, parfit gentil knyght.
The prohibition on double negatives may have begun with Robert Lowth, an 18th
century Bishop of London, who wrote A Short Introduction to English Grammar.
Perhaps his high status as a bishop led people to believe that his strictures on language
were divinely inspired. The ban stuck. In the late 19th century, for example, an
educator commented: “The student is instructed how contrary to reason is a double
negative”. Yet it never entirely disappeared. It is still found in some varieties of
English, as in the old music hall song: “I don’t not know no-one who don’t want no
nine inch nails. I don’t not know no-one who don’t want no nine inch nails. I know
the King, I know the Queen, I know the Prince of Wales, but I don’t not know no-one
who don’t want no nine inch nails.
Another artificially imposed rule involves “different to”. “I am irritated by the
frequent use of the words ‘different to’ on radio and other programmes,” ran a letter to
a daily paper. “In my schooldays of 50 years ago we were taught that things were
2

alike to and different from. Were our teachers so terribly ignorant?” Well, different to
is found even in the 17th century. “How much different art thou to this curs’d spirit
here,” said the dramatist Thomas Dekker in 1603. The imposition of “different from”
is a misguided attempt to make English behave more like Latin. But it is pointless to
judge one language by the standards of another. Some of these old invented
prohibitions remind one of Alice in Wonderland: “That’s not a regular rule. You
invented it just now,” Alice complained to the King.
Moving onto the 19th century, proper behaviour was a major concern to a lot of
people. Etiquette books were popular and precepts about language were issued
alongside advice about table manners. Consider some of the instructions in Don’t, a
manual of mistakes and improprieties more or less prevalent in conduct and speech,
which was published around 1880. Don’t drink from your saucer; don’t wear
diamonds in the morning; don’t neglect the small hairs that project from the nostrils
and grow about the apertures of the ears; don’t say gents for gentlemen, nor pants for
pantaloons. These are inexcusable vulgarisms. Don’t say transpire when you mean
occur. Don’t say “loads of time” or “oceans of time”. Say “ample time” or “time
enough”. Don’t use a plural pronoun when a singular is called for. “Everybody put on
their hats” illustrates a prevalent error. Don’t say “It is him.” Say “It is he” … and so
on and so on. Some of these artificial rules have been passed down from generation to
generation. Their main effect is to make people insecure, to worry that they might not
be using the right phrase, just as they might get anxious that they are not using the
right type of spoon for soup.
Again and again etiquette, morals and speech are confused. Groombridges’ Annual
Reader, a manual of recitation for the use of schools, said in 1867: “Speech is a gift of
God, and the habit of speaking correct English next to good morals is one of the best
things in the world”. We might laugh at this quaint confusion of morals and speech,
except that it is still found nowadays. In 1985, bad English, whatever that might be,
was even linked to crime by Lord Tebbit, then a key government figure. He said: “If
you allow standards to slip to the stage where good English is no better than bad
English, where people turn up filthy . . . at school . . . all those things tend to cause
people to have no standards at all, and once you lose standards then there’s no
imperative to stay out of crime.”

This tangled web of worries around language shows that many people, including
some of those who rule our country, are back in the dark ages over understanding how
it works.
But it is oversimple to lump all language worries together, and just dismiss them. The
different strands of worry need to be teased out. Above all, three overlapping
accusations recur, which can be called the “damp spoon” syndrome, the “crumbling
castle” view, and the “infectious disease” assumption.
The “damp spoon” image comes from a newspaper writer, who has a “queasy
distaste” for the “vulgarity” of some current usages, “precisely the kind of distaste I
feel at seeing a damp spoon dipped in the sugar bowl or butter spread with the breadknife”. She implies that sloppiness and laziness cause much of language change.

3

The notion that change is due to laziness has been around for a long time. In the last
century, many people had a romantic notion of primitive tribes as noble savages. The
linguist Max Muller, for example, argued that there’s “a laziness inherent in
civilisation, so that sophisticated people no longer use the forceful articulatory
movements required for primitive tongues, which are a preference for relatively easy
sounds produced fairly far forward in the mouth.” But this is rubbish; sounds move
back in the mouth as well as forwards. One that has moved back is the increasingly
common pronounciation of bu’er with a glottal stop in place of older butter. But Be’y
’ad a bi’ of bi’er bu’er requires a lot of muscular tension and cannot be regarded as a
lazy development.
The only truly lazy speech is drunken speech, where alcohol affects co-ordination,
and English is not getting like drunken speech. Some years ago researchers at the
University of Texas checked this out. They plied student volunteers with slugs of neat
whiskey every twenty minutes for six hours; and before each new drink, they asked
the students to read a word list and chat. They found that the bumbles and mumbles of
drunkards were fairly unlike the alterations in normal change. Drunken people keep
vowels much the same, but lengthen consonants which get dragged out. They are also
likely to pronounce ‘s’ and ‘ch’ as ‘sh’. These effects are due to a temporary lack of
muscular coordination and are not happening in English as a whole.
CLIP: EXAMPLE OF DRUNKEN SPEECH
The omission in spoken speech of past tense endings is also sometimes claimed to be
laziness, as in “Pamela jump back” rather than "Pamela jumpED back”. “Peter
climbed carefully down” rather than “Peter climbED carefully down”. But these
omissions enable speech to be speeded up, and are unlikely to destroy the meaning.
So there is a trade off between smooth, fast speech and slow, careful, jerky speech.
Faster speech involves more words per minute and cannot be classed as laziness. Of
course fast speech forms occur mostly in casual conversation. But informal speech is
not intrinsically “worse” than formal speech. It is just different. Humans naturally
adapt their speech to suit the situation: they slow it down for babies and strangers, and
they speed it up for friends. Eventually, some of these changes found in fast speech
will creep into all types of spoken language. Only actors pronounce handbag as it is
written.
CLIP: THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST
Lady Bracknell: Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first class ticket for
this seaside resort find you?
Jack Worthing: In a handbag.
Lady Bracknell: A handbag?
Almost everybody else says “hambag”. Once a change of this type has occurred,
hearers often judge the older, outmoded form to be pedantic and less streamlined.
But let’s move on to the “crumbling castle” view. This treats the English language as
a beautiful old building with gargoyles and pinnacles which need to be preserved
intact, as implied in statements by the writer John Simon: Language, he argues,
should be treated like “parks, national forests, monuments, and public utilities . . .
available for properly respectful use but not for defacement or destruction”.
4

This view itself crumbles when examined carefully. It implies that the castle of
English was gradually and lovingly assembled until it reached a point of maximum
splendour at some unspecified time in the past. Yet no year can be found when
language achieved some peak of perfection, like a vintage wine. Nor have those who
claim that English is declining ever suggested what this date might have been.
And the “beautiful building” notion presupposes that rigid systems, once assembled,
are better than changing ones. This is untrue. In the animal world, flexibility is a great
advantage, and animals which adhere to fixed systems often lose out. Consider the
blue-footed booby, a seabird which lives on the Galapagos Islands. This gannet
behaves according to a rule of thumb: in the nest feed it; out of the nest ignore it. So if
a young booby falls out of its nest, it inevitably dies - even when the nest is at ground
level. A less rigid system might allow the parent boobies to assess whether or not the
squawking displaced youngster was one of their own; and, if so, push it back into the
nest. But the booby’s rigid system doesn’t allow for this.
The ever-shifting nature of language keeps it flexible, so it can cope with changing
social circumstances, as with the rush of new words relating to cars in the 20th
century, such as the recent “autochondria” - from “automobile” and “hypochondria” someone with excessive concern for the health of their car.
“Crumbling castle” supporters might argue that such additions are trivial and
allowable, as long as older forms are preserved as well. But in the long run this is
impossible, as shown by the increasing loss of old past tense forms, which provide a
clear example of how earlier forms get whittled away. First, the old irregular forms
gradually get forgotten, especially when the verbs are rarely used ones. In this
century, “gelded” and “girded” have mostly replaced “gelt” and “girt” as the past
tense forms of “geld” and “gird”, and many people don’t even realise a change has
occurred. Replacement can happen even with better known verbs. The clothes
designer Donna Karan, discussing the letters she received, said: “Anything that beared
my name, I’d open”. Second, new uses of old forms tend to acquire regular endings as
in “shoot up” of drugs: “Someone passed me this syringe and I shooted up,” said a
drug taker in the Guardian. Third, any new forms receive regular inflections as in the
word “bland out” - “become conformist”. “Those that didn’t burn out, blanded out”,
according to a writer in the New Musical Express. So more and more old forms are
wiped away, as new, regular forms flood in. But this is not disintegration. Sweeping
up old oddments is good housekeeping, or rather, good language-keeping. Gradual
neatening up of patterns is inevitable and essential. In this way, the mind avoids
becoming overloaded with unpredictable oddments.
Neatening up also happens with nouns. Houses were once housen and shoes were
shooen, parallel to oxen. Imported words get tidied up, too. The Italian word graffito,
“scratch”, has been in use in English for well over a century, usually in the plural
graffiti, meaning “scratches or scribbles on walls”. Recently this plural has begun to
be treated as if it were the singular. “Graffiti is disgusting,” proclaimed an official
notice on a London bus. Not everyone likes this. “The solecism a graffiti is surprising
and distressing”, according to a letter in the Daily Telegraph. But most English plurals
now end with ‘s’, so the treatment of graffiti as singular is in line with the general
5

tidying up process, which has been going on for centuries. Language is not crumbling
away. It is maintaining itself pretty efficiently.
But let’s move on to the “infectious disease” view. In an article entitled Polluting Our
Language, the writer expressed a widespread view that we somehow “catch” changes
from those around us, and that we ought to fight such diseases: “The wholesale spread
of corruption may surely be ascribed to mere infection, to the careless, unthinking
assimilation of the floating germs which envelop us.” Change is indeed brought about
through social contact, so the catching notion is not entirely wrong. But the “disease”
metaphor falls down. People pick up changes because they want to. They want to fit
in with social groups, and they adapt their hairstyle, clothes, and language, to those of
people they admire, as with the Jocks and Burnouts, teenagers in a suburban high
school in Detroit. Jocks were regular guys who joined in school sports and wanted to
conform. Burnouts were rebels who took drugs and behaved unconventionally. The
speech of these two groups showed clear differences with the Jocks imitating the
standard adult pattern, but the Burnouts moving away from it. Adapting to those
around is normal human behaviour. In Northern Ireland, East Belfast men and West
Belfast women both showed a tendency to pronounce “grass” as “grawss” at a time
when, in theory, the two halves of Belfast barely talked to one another. What could
have been happening? The mind boggles. But the explanation was quite simple. East
Belfast men sometimes visited a city-centre store staffed by mainly West Belfast
women. It’s well known that shop assistants match their speech to that of their
customers, and this is what was happening. The shop assistants were then transferring
the pronunciation to their friends.
But changes aren’t random. They take hold only if the language is predisposed to
move in a particular direction. Social contact can trigger a change only if it was
already likely to happen. The predisposition factor is often overlooked. At any time,
in any language, a number of potential change-points exist. Anomalies tend to get
smoothed out, as with the tidying up of past tenses and plurals. Human ears and the
human vocal tract cause others. Consonants at the end of words are a weak spot in
languages, since ends of words are pronounced with less force than beginnings: it’s
Kick, not kiCK. In British English, “t” at the end of words is eroding, moving from
street to stree(t) and in the long run, it will be stree. The change is found in so-called
Estuary English, around the Thames Estuary. It’s also found in Scotland around
Glasgow.
CLIP: BILLY CONNOLLY: A lot of kids like me. They don’t come to the concerts
or shows; but in Glasgow, in the stree(t), the kids all shout at me and things.
Over time, end-of-word consonants may largely disappear, as has happened in some
dialects of Chinese, several Polynesian languages, and, nearer at hand, in French and
Italian, where most words now end in vowels: Una bottiglia di vino bianco, “a bottle
of white wine”. Oddly, people who dislike this change often praise languages such as
Italian as being “beautiful” even though many Italian words are simply Latin without
their endings: Italian vino, “wine”, was once Latin vinum.
Changes are normally triggered by personal contact, as with the Belfast shop
assistants, and not via the media. The media are often blamed for change, but their
role is indirect. Newspapers can popularise new words such as “bonk”, “yomp” and
6

“wimp”, and radio and television can influence attitudes towards language. These
days, they send the sensible but indirect message that it’s all right to talk in different
ways. Janet Street-Porter, Lenny Henry, Cilla Black and others show that variety is
the spice of linguistic life.
JANET STREET PORTER: Take a look at this. Elementary certificate. That’s a laugh
because I couldn’t swim. If you imagine me swimming without my glasses on. I mean
that is a real laugh.
LENNY HENRY: And then she worked for several years. And then I was born in ‘58
and then I sort of lived in and around Dudley and grew up with a West Midlands
accent, which is really weird.
CILLA BLACK: Anybody in the audience tonight remember me when I first started?
(shouts of “yes”) Oh gosh, you’re older than ya look. You are indeed.
Their different accents, like their different clothes, are a mark of individuality.
Variety is the key to language change. Earlier in the century, an old mutation
viewpoint prevailed, that some sounds slowly turned into others, like tadpoles
gradually changing into frogs. This is now outmoded. According to a newer view,
variant forms arise, each used in a different area or speech style. Then one of the
newcomers gets used more and more often and gradually ousts the older form, like a
young cuckoo heaving an existing bird out of the nest. In some situations, a whole
nestful of young cuckoos compete with each other and with older forms. They may
squabble for a long time until one wins out.
This process is clearest in the case of vocabulary. It happened with the word
“partner”, which is now the standard word for life-companion. But at one time
numerous words competed: live-in lover, mate, and for heterosexuals, posslq, an
acronym for “persons of opposite sex sharing living quarters”. Then the word
“partner” gradually pushed the other terms aside.

The young cuckoo process also happens with pronunciation as with the butter and
bu’er variants which are competing in British English. They’re likely to co-exist,
maybe for a longish time. Eventually bu’er may well win out, as these examples
show. No change can occur without variation, though variation can sometimes exist
without change.
Variation in speech is the norm. Our linguistic wardrobe contains a range of speech
styles, which we suit to the occasion. Bus-conductors, bosses and babies need to be
addressed in different ways. Change often happens when one particular variant
expands its usage. But which variants should be used where and when still causes
arguments as sharp as barbed-wire, especially as nowadays being “matey” is often
more important than being “proper”, resulting in increasing approval of informal
styles of speech, including swearing. I will return to this question in the third lecture.
Meanwhile, the tangled web of worries around language shows how little most people
know about it. Next week I'll go right back to the beginning and discuss the origin of
7

language in the human species. A web of deceit and a web of friendship combine to
produce the real web: the web of language.
But finally, I would like to stress again that we need to understand language, not try to
control it. Samuel Johnson said this better than anyone else in 1755 in the preface to
his dictionary: When we see men grow old and die … we laugh at the elixir that
promises to prolong life to a thousand years; and with equal justice may the
lexicographer be derided … who shall imagine that his dictionary can embalm his
language … With this hope, however, academies have been instituted to guard the
avenues of their languages … but their vigilance and activity have hitherto been in
vain … to enchain syllables and to lash the wind are equally the undertakings of pride.

8

