REITH LECTURES 1997: The Genealogy of Race
Patricia Williams
Lecture 3: The Distribution of Distress
TRANSMISSION: 11 March 1997 – BBC Radio 4

Many years ago, I was standing in a so-called “juice bar” in Berkeley, California. A
young man came in who I had often seen begging in the neighbourhood. A more
bruised looking human being one could not imagine: he was missing several teeth; his
clothes were in rags; his blond hair was matted; his eyes red-rimmed; his nails long
and black and broken.
On this particular morning, he came into the juice bar and ordered some sort of
protein drink from the well-scrubbed, patchouli-scented young woman behind the
counter. It was obvious that his presence disturbed her; and when he took his drink
and mumbled, “Thanks little lady,” she exploded. “Don’t you dare call me little lady!”
she snarled with a ferocity that turned heads. “I’m a woman and you’d better learn the
difference!” “Sorry,” he whispered, with his head bowed like a dog that had been
kicked, and he quite literally limped out of the store. “Good riddance!”, the woman
called after him.
This took place some 15 years ago, but I’ve always remembered the interchange
because it taught me a lot about the not so subliminal messages that can be wrapped in
the expression ‘a virtue aggrieved’, in which anti-bias of one sort is used to further the
agenda of bias of another kind.
In an abstract sense, I understood the resentment of girlish diminutives. Too often as a
lawyer, I have been in courtroom situations where coy terms of endearment were
employed in such a way that “the little lady, god bless her” became a marginalising
condescension, a precise condensation of “she thinks she’s a lawyer, poor thing”. Yet
in this instance clearly gender power was not the issue, but rather the emotional
venting of a revulsion at this man’s dirty and bedraggled presence. It wasn’t just that
he had called her a “little lady”. She seemed angry that he had dared address her at all.
If upon occasion the ploughshare of feminism can be beaten into a sword of class
prejudice, no less can there be another examples of what I call ‘battling biases’ in
which the impulse to anti-discrimination is defeated by the intrusion or substitution of
a different object of enmity.
This revolving door revulsions is one of the trickiest mechanisms contributing to the
enduring nature of prejudice. It is at heart, I suppose, a kind of traumatic reiteration of
injurious encounters, preserving even as it transforms the overall history of rage.
I was here in England several years ago when a young Asian man was severely beaten
in East London by a young white man. I was gratified to see the immediate
renunciation of racism that ensued in the media. It was a somewhat more
sophisticated and heartfelt collective self-examination than sometimes occurs in the
1

United States in the wake of such incidents where, I fear, we are much more jaded
about all forms of violence.
Nevertheless, what intrigued me most about the media coverage of this assault was
the unfortunate way in which class bias became a tool for the denunciation of racism.
‘Racial, ethnic or religious prejudice is repugnant’, screamed the headlines. Hurray, I
thought. And then the full text: ‘It is repugnant particularly’ - and I’m embellishing
here - ‘when committed by a miserable, low class cockney whose bestial nature
knows no plummeted depth’, etcetera, etcetera. Oh dear, I thought. In other words, the
media not only defined anti-Asian and anti-immigrant animus as ignorance - as surely
it is - but went on to define that ignorance as the property of a class of the lower
classes’, implying even that a good Oxbridge education inevitably lifts one above that
sort of thing, as surely it does not.
And therein lies a problem, I think: if race or ethnicity is not a synonym for either
ignorance or foreignness, then neither should class be an explanatory trash bin for
racial prejudice, domestic incivility and a host of other social ills. If the last 50 years
have taught us nothing else, it is that our isms are no less insidious when beautifully
polished and terribly refined.
None of us is beyond some such pitfalls, and in certain contexts typecasting can even
also be a necessary and helpful way of explaining the social world. The hard task is to
untangle the instances where the categoric helps us predict and prepare for the world
from those instances where it verges into scapegoating, projection and prejudice.
To restate the problem, I think that the persistence of racism, ethnic and religious
intolerance, as well as gender and class bias, are dependent upon re-circulating images
in which the general and the particular dual each other endlessly. “On guard, you
heathenish son of an inferior category.” “Brute,” comes the response. “I am
inalienably endowed with the unique luminosity of my rational individualism. It is
you who are the guttural eruption of an unspeakable sub-classification.” Thrust and
parry on and on, the play of race versus ethnicity, versus class, versus blood feud. One
sword may be sharper or quicker, but neither’s wound is ever healed.
Too often these tensions are resolved simply by concluding that stereotyping is just
our lot as humans, so let the consequences fall where they may. But stereotyping
operates as habit, not immutable trait - a fluid project that flows rather too easily
across the shifting ecology of human relation; and racism is a very old, very bad habit.
This malleability of prejudice is underscored by a little cultural comparison. If class
bias has skewed discussions of racism in the British examples I have just described, it
is rather more common in the United States for race to consume discussions of class
altogether.
While I don’t want to overstate the cultural differences between the US and Great
Britain, there is certainly enough similarly to conclude that race and class present a
generally interlocking set of problems in both nations. The United States does deem
itself classless with almost the same degree of self-congratulation that Britain prides
itself on being largely free of a history of racial bias. Certainly these are good
impulses and desirable civic sentiments, but I am always one to look closely at what is
2

deemed beyond the pale. ‘It will never happen here’. The noblest denials are at least
as interesting study as the highest ideals.
Consider: for a supposedly classless society, the US nevertheless suffers the greatest
gap of any industrialised nation between its richest and poorest citizens, and there can
be no more dramatic and ironic class consciousness than the Dickensian
characteristics ascribed to those in the so-called underclass. As opposed to the rest,
what are we to call them: the overclass; those who are deemed to have class versus
those who are so far beneath the usual indicia of even lower class that they are
deemed to have no class at all?
If this is not viewed by most Americans as a problem of class stasis, it is perhaps
because class denominations are so uniformly understood to be stand-ins for race. The
very term “underclass” is a euphemism for blackness - class operating as euphemism
in that we Americans are an upbeat kind of people and class is usually thought to be
an easier problem than race.
Middle-classness, on the other hand, is so persistently a euphemism for whiteness that
middle class black people are sometimes described as “honorary whites” or as those
who have been “deracinated” in some vaguely political sense.
More often than I like to remember, I have been told that my opinion about this or that
couldn’t possibly be relevant to real, authentic black people. Why? Simply because I
don’t sound like a Hollywood stereotype of the way black people are supposed to talk.
Speech becomes a sort of property of one race or another: “speaking white” or
“talking black”. No in between. Speaking as a black person while sounding like a
white person has, I have found, engendered some complicated sense of betrayal.
“You’re not black. You’re not white.” No-one seems particularly interested in the
substantive ideas being expressed, but everyone is caught up with the question of
whether anyone should have to listen to a white voiced black person.
It is in this way that we often talk about class and race, such that we sometimes end
up talking about neither because we insist on talking about race as though it were
class, and class as though it were race, and it’s hard to see very clearly when the
waters are so muddied with all that simile and metaphor.
By the same token, America is usually deemed a society in which the accent with
which one speaks does not matter. That is largely true, but it is not so as to black
accents. While there is much made of regional variations - New Yorkers, Minnesotans
and Southerners are the butts of a certain level of cheap satire - an accent deemed
black is the one with some substantial risk of evoking outright discrimination.
In fact the speech of real black people ranges from true dialects to myriad patois, to
regional accents, to specifics and tactical twists or usages of vocabulary. Yet language
identified as black is habitually flattened into some singularised entity that in turn
becomes synonymous with ignorance, slang, big lips and sloppy tongues, incoherent
ideas and very bad, terribly unruly linguistic acts. Black speech becomes a cipher for
all the other stereotypes associated with racial discrimination. The refusal to
understand becomes rationalised by the assumption of incomprehensibility.

3

My colleague, Professor Mari Matsuda, has studied cases involving accent
discrimination; she writes of lawsuits whose transcripts revealed an interesting
paradox. One case featured a speaker whose accent had been declared
“incomprehensible” by his employer. Nevertheless, his recorded testimony, copied
down with no difficulty by the court reporter, revealed a parlance more grammatically
accurate, substantively coherent and syntactically graceful than any other speaker in
the courtroom, including the judge. This paradox has always been the subject of some
interest among linguists and sociolinguists; the degree to which language is
understood in a way that is intimately linked to relations among speakers.
“Good day,” I say to you. Do you see me as a genial neighbour, as part of your day? If
so, you may be generously disposed to return the geniality with a hearty, hail fellow
well met. “Good day,” I say. Do you see me as an impudent upstart, the very sound of
whose voice is an unwelcome intrusion upon your good day? If so, the greeting
becomes an act of aggression. Woe betide the cheerful, innocent upstart. “Shall we
consider race?” I say to you. If you are disposed to like me, you might hear this as an
invitation to a kind of conversation we have not shared before: a leap of faith into
knowing more about each other. “Shall we consider race?” I say. Not “Shall I batter
you with guilt before we riot in the streets?” but only “Shall we consider race?” Yet if
I am that same upstart, the blood will have boiled up in your ears by now and very
shortly you will start to have tremors at the unreasonable audacity of my meddlesome
presumption. Nothing I actually say will matter for what matters is that I am out of
place.
This dynamic, this vital ingredient of the willingness to hear is apparent in the
contradiction of lower status speech being simultaneously understood, yet not
understood. Why is the sound of black voices, the shape of black bodies so
overwhelmingly agreeable, so colourfully comprehensible in some contexts particularly in sports and entertainment industries - yet deemed so utterly incapable of
effective communication or acceptable presence when it comes to finding a job as a
construction worker?
This is an odd conundrum to find the sight and the sound of oneself a kind of red flag.
And it is a kind of banner, one’s face and one’s tongue; a banner of family and
affiliation that rhythm and stress the buoyance of one’s mother’s tongue; that plain of
jaw, that prominence of brow, the property of one’s father’s face.
There is a tension perhaps in the political goal of racial neutrality with those social
pressures that would push the region of the body underground in order to allow the
purity of one’s inner soul to be more fully seen.
When Martin Luther King urged that “we be judged by the content of our character,”
surely he meant that what we looked like should not matter? And just as surely, that
enterprise did not involve having to deny entirely the complicated symbolic character
of one’s physical manifestation.
This is a hard point, I confess, and one fraught with risk of misunderstanding. The
colour of one’s skin is a part of ourselves, and yet it does not matter. It is precious,
and yet it should not matter. It is important, and yet it must not matter. It is

4

simultaneously our greatest vanity and anxiety, and I am of the opinion - like Martin
Luther King - that none of this should matter.
Let me offer a more layered illustration of the way in which these issues of race and
class interact; the markers of class distinction and bias in the UK emerging also in the
US as overlapping substantially with the category of race.
A few years ago I purchased a house. Because the house was in a different state than
where I was located at the time, I obtained my mortgage by telephone. I am a prudent,
little squirrel when it comes to things financial - always tucking away sufficient stores
of nuts for the winter - and so I meet the criteria of a quite good credit risk. My loan
was approved almost immediately.
A short time after, the contract came in the mail. Among the papers the bank
forwarded were forms documenting compliance with what is called The Fair Housing
Act. It is against the law to discriminate against black people in the housing market,
and one of the pieces of legislation to that effect is the Fair Housing Act - a law that
monitors lending practices to prevent banks from doing what is called “red lining”.
Red lining is a phenomenon whereby banks circle certain neighbourhoods on the map
and refuse to lend in those areas for reasons based on race. There are a number of
variations on a theme: black people cannot get loans to purchase homes in white areas
or black people cannot get start-up money for small businesses in black areas. The
Fair Housing Act thus tracks the race of all banking customers to prevent such
discrimination. Unfortunately, some banks also use the racial information disclosed
on the Fair Housing forms to engage in precisely the discrimination the law seeks to
prevent.
I should repeat that to this point my entire mortgage transaction had been conducted
by telephone. I should also say that I speak what is considered in the US a very
received standard English - regionally North Eastern perhaps, but not marked as
black. With my credit history, with my job as a law professor, and no doubt with my
accent, I am not only middle class but match the cultural stereotype of a good white
person. It is thus perhaps that the loan officer of this bank, whom I had never met in
person, had checked off a box on the Fair Housing form indicating that I was white.
Race shouldn’t matter, I suppose, but it seemed to in this case. So I took a deep
breath, crossed out white, checked the box marked black, and sent the contract back to
the bank. That will teach them to presume too much, I thought. A done deal, I
assumed.
Suddenly the deal came to a screeching halt. The bank wanted more money as a down
payment. They wanted me to pay more points, as certain extra charges are called.
They wanted to raise the rate of interest. Suddenly I found myself facing great
resistance and much more debt.
What was most interesting about all of this was that the reason the bank gave for its
newfound recalcitrance was not race. Heaven forbid, racism doesn’t exist anymore hadn’t I heard? No, the reason they gave was that property values in that
neighbourhood were “suddenly falling”. They wanted more money to cover the
increased risk.

5

Initially I was surprised, confused. The house was in a neighbourhood that was
extremely stable. Prices in the area had not gone down since World War Two, only
slowly, steadily up. I’m an extremely careful shopper and I had uncovered absolutely
no indication that prices were falling at all. It took my estate agent to make me see the
light. “Don’t you get it?” he said. “This is what they always do.” And even though I
work with this sort of thing all the time, I really hadn’t gotten it, for of course I was
the reason the prices were in peril. The bank was proceeding according to
demographic data that show any time black people move into a neighbourhood in the
US whites are overwhelmingly likely to move out - in droves, in panic, in concert,
pulling every imaginable resource with them from school funding to garbage
collection to social workers who don’t want to work in black neighbourhoods, to
police whose too frequent relation to black communities is a corrupted one of
containment rather than protection.
It’s called a “tipping point”, this thing that happens when blacks move into white
neighbourhoods. The imagery is awfully catchy, you must admit - the neighbourhood
just tipping right on over like a terrible accident; whoops, like a picture I suppose. All
that nice, fresh, wholesome milk spilling out, running away, leaving the dark echoing
upended urn of the inner city.
This immense fear of the black next door is one reason the US is so densely
segregated. Only 2% of white people have a black neighbour, even though black
people comprise approximately 13% of the population. Whites fear blacks in big
ways, in small ways, in financial ways, in utterly incomprehensible ways.
As for my mortgage, I threatened to sue and eventually procured the loan on the
original terms. But what was fascinating to me about this whole incident was the way
in which this so exemplified the new problems of the new rhetoric of racism. For
starters, the new rhetoric of racism never mentions race. It wasn’t race, but risk with
which the bank was concerned. Secondly, since financial risk is all about economics,
my exclusion got reclassified as just a consideration of class - and there’s no law
against class discrimination, after all, for that would present a restraint on one of our
most precious liberties: the freedom to contract or not.
If public schools, trains, buses, swimming pools and neighbourhoods remain
segregated, it’s no longer a racial problem if someone who just happens to be white
keeps hiking the price for someone who just accidentally and purely, by the way,
happens to be black.
White people set higher prices for the right, the choice of self-segregation. If black
people don’t want to move in, it’s just because they can’t afford to. Black people pay
higher prices for the attempt to integrate, even as the integration of oneself is a threat
to one’s investment by lowering its value.
By this measure of mortgage worthiness, the ingredient of blackness is cast not just as
a social toll, but an actual tax: a fee, an extra contribution at the door, an admission
charge for the higher costs of handling my dangerous propensities, my inherently
unsavoury properties. I was not judged based on my independent attributes or
individual financial worth as a client; nor even was I judged by statistical profiles of
what my group actually do, for in fact anxiety-stricken middle class black people
6

make grovellingly good, cake-baking neighbours when not made to feel defensive by
the unfortunate historical welcome strategies of bombs, burnings or abandon.
Rather I was being evaluated based on what an abstraction of white society writ large
thinks we - or I - do, and that imagined doing was treated and thus established as a
self-fulfilling prophecy. However rationalised, this form of discrimination is a burden.
One’s very existence becomes a lonely vacuum when so many in society not only
devalue me, but devalue themselves and their homes for having me as part of the
landscaped view from the quiet of their breakfast nook.
I know, I know, I exist in the world on my own terms surely. I am an individual and
all that. But if I carry the bank’s logic out with my individuality rather than my
collectively imagined effect on property values - as the subject of this type of
irrational economic computation - then I, the charming and delightful Patricia J.
Williams - become a bit like a carwash in your back yard, only much worse in real
price terms. I am more than a mere violation of the nice residential comfort zone in
question. My blackness can rezone altogether by the mere fortuity of my relocation.
“Dumping district,” cringes the nice, clean actuarial family next door. “There goes the
neighbourhood” as whole geographic tracts slide into the chasm of impecuniousness
and disgust. I am the economic equivalent of a medical waste disposal site, a toxic
heap, a home.
In my brand new house, I hover behind my brand new kitchen curtains, wondering
whether the very appearance of myself will endanger my collateral yet further. When
Benetton ran an advertisement and darkened Queen Elizabeth II’s skin to a nice, rich
brown, the Sun newspaper ran an article observing that this “obviously cheapens the
monarchy”. Will the presentation of myself so disperse the value of my own, my
ownership, my property? It is an intolerable logic an investment in my property
compels a selling of myself.
I grew up in a white neighbourhood where my mother’s family had been the only
black people for about 50 years. In the 1960s Boston began to feel the effects of the
great migration of Southern black people to the North that came about as a result of
the Civil Rights Movement. Two more black families moved into the neighbourhood.
There was a sudden churning, a chemical response, a collective roiling with streams
of froth and jets of steam. We children heard all about it in the playground: the
neighbourhood was under siege; the blacks were coming.
My schoolmates’ parents were moving out en masse. It was remarkable; the
neighbourhood was entirely black within about a year. I am a risk pool; I am a
carwash.
I was affected, I suppose, growing up with those children who frightened themselves
by imagining what it would be like to touch black bodies, to kiss those wide, unkissable lips, to draw the pure breath of life through that crude and forbidden expanse
of nose. Is it really possible that a gentle god - their god, dear god - would let a human
heart reside within the wet, charred thickness of black skin?
I am, they told me, a jumble of discarded parts: low-browed monkey bones and
infected, softly pungent flesh. In fact, my price on the market is a variable affair. If I
7

were crushed and sorted into common elements, my salt and juice and calcinated bits
are worth approximately £5. Fresh from the kill, in contrast, my body parts, my lungs
and liver, heart and healthy arteries would fetch some £40,000. There is no demand
for the fruit of my womb, however: eggs fresh from its warm, dark sanctuary are
worthless on the open market. ‘Irish egg donor sought’ reads an ad in the little weekly
newspaper that serves New York City’s parent population. And in the weird economy
of bloodlines and with the insidious variability of prejudice, Irish eggs command a
price of upwards of £5,000.
This silent market in black worth is pervasive. When a certain brand of hiking boots
became popular among young people in Harlem, the manufacturer pulled the product
from inner city stores, fearing that such a trend would ruin the image of their boot
among the larger market of whites. It’s funny, even shoes.
Last year I had a funny experience in a shoe store. The salesman would only bring me
one shoe, not two. “I can’t try on a pair?” I asked in disbelief. “When you pay for a
pair,” he retorted. “What if there were a hundred of you?” he continued. “How would
we keep track?” I was the only customer in the store, but there were a hundred of me
in his head.
In our Anglo American jurisprudence, there is a general constraint limiting the right to
sue to cases and controversies affecting the individual. As an individual, I could go to
the great and ridiculous effort of suing for the miniscule amount at stake in waiting
for the other shoe to drop from his hand.
But as for the real claim - the group claim, the larger defamation to all those other
hundreds of me - well that will be a considerably tougher road to hoe. I am one; I am
many. I am amiable, orderly, extremely honest and a very good neighbour indeed. I
am suspect profile, market cluster, actuarial monster, statistical being. My particulars,
battle of the generals. “Typecasting,” I protest. “Predictive indicator” assert the
keepers of the gate. “Prejudice,” I say. “Precaution,” they reply. Hundreds, even
thousands of me hover in the breach.

8

