REITH LECTURES 1997: The Genealogy of Race
Patricia Williams
Lecture 1: The Emperor’s New Clothes
TRANSMISSION: 25 February 1997 – BBC Radio 4

My son attends a small nursery school. Over the past year, three different teachers in
his school assured me he was colour-blind. Resigned to this diagnosis, I took my son
to an ophthalmologist who tested him and pronounced his vision perfect. I could not
figure out what was going on until I began to listen carefully to what he was saying
about colour.
As it turned out, my son did not misidentify colour; he resisted identifying colour at
all. “I don’t know,” he would say, when asked what colour the grass was; or, most
peculiarly, “It makes no difference.” This latter, this assertion of the greenest of grass
making no difference, was such a precociously cynical retort that I began to suspect
some social complication in which he was somehow invested.
The long and the short of it are that the well-meaning teachers at his predominantly
white school had valiantly and repeatedly assured their charges that colour makes no
difference. “It doesn’t matter,” they told the children, “whether you’re black or white
or red or green or blue.” Yet upon further investigation, the very reason that the
teachers had felt it necessary to impart this lesson in the first place was that it did
matter and in predictably cruel ways. Some of the children had been fighting about
whether black people could play good guys.
My son’s anxious response was redefined by his teachers as physical deficiency. This
anxiety, redefined as deficiency, suggests to me that it may be illustrative of the way
in which the liberal ideal of colour blindness is too often confounded. That is to say,
the very notion of blindness about colour constitutes an ideological confusion at best
and denial at its very worst.
I recognise certainly that the teachers were inspired by a desire to make whole a
division in the ranks. But there is much overlooked in the move to undo that which
clearly and unfortunately matters just by labelling it that which makes no difference.
The dismissiveness, however unintentional, leaves those in my son’s position pulled
between the clarity of their own experience and the often alienating terms in which
they must seek social acceptance.
There’s a lot of that in the world right now: someone has just announced in no
uncertain terms that they hate you because you’re dark, let’s say, or Catholic or a
woman or the wrong height, and the panicked authority figures try to patch things up
by reassuring you that race or gender or stature or your heartfelt religion doesn’t
matter; means nothing in the calculation of your humanity, is the most insignificant
little puddle of beans in the world.

1

While I do want to underscore that I do embrace colour-blindness as a legitimate hope
for the future, I worry that we tend to enshrine the notion with a kind of utopianism
whose naïveté will assure its elusiveness. In the material world ranging from
playgrounds to politics, our ideals perhaps need more thoughtful, albeit more
complicated, guardianship. When I refer to a more complicated guardianship, I mean
something more than the “I think, therefore it is” school of idealism. “I don’t think
about colour; therefore your problems don’t exist.” If only it were so easy.
But if indeed it’s not that easy, then the application of such quick fixes becomes not
just a shortcut, but a short circuiting of the process of resolution. In the example of my
son’s school experience, the collective aversion to confronting the social tensions he
faced resulted in their being pathologised as his individual physical limitation. This is
a phenomenon that happens all too frequently to children of colour in a variety of
contexts. In both the US and in the UK, the disproportionate numbers of black
children who end up in special education or who are written off as failures attest to the
degree to which this is a profound source of social anxiety.
In addition, the failure to deal straightforwardly with the pervasive practices of
exclusion that infect even the very young allowed my son’s white schoolmates to
indulge in the false luxury of prematurely imagined community. By this I mean that
we can all be lulled rather too easily into a self-congratulatory stance of preached
universalism: “We are the world. We are the children!” was the evocative, fullthroated harmony of a few years ago. Yet nowhere has that been invoked more
passionately than in the face of tidal waves of dissension, and even as “the” children
learnt that “we” children are not like “those”, the benighted creatures on the other side
of the pale.
This tension between material conditions and what one is cultured to see or not see the dilemma of the Emperor’s new clothes, we might call it - is a tension faced by any
society riven by bitter histories of imposed hierarchy. I don’t mean to suggest that we
need always go about feeling guilty or responsible or perpetually burdened by original
sin or notions of political correctness. I do wish, however, to counsel against the facile
innocence of those three notorious monkeys: Hear No Evil, See No Evil, and Speak
No Evil. Theirs is a purity achieved through ignorance. Ours must be a world in
which we know each other better.
To put it another way, it is a dangerous, if comprehensible temptation, to imagine
inclusiveness by imagining away its obstacles. It is in this way that the moral high
ground of good intentions knows its limits. We must be careful not to allow our
intentions to verge into outright projection by substituting a fantasy of global
seamlessness that is blinding rather than just colour-blind.
This is a dilemma - being “coloured” so to speak in a world of normative whiteness;
whiteness being defined as the absence of colour. The drive to conform our
surroundings to whatever we know as “normal” is a powerful force: convention in
many ways more powerful than reason, and customs in some instances more powerful
than law. While surely most customs and conventions encode the insights of ancient
wisdom, the habits of racial thought in Western society just as surely encapsulate
some of the greatest mistakes in human history. So how do we rethink this most
troubled of divisions, the fault line in our body politic, the fault line in ourselves? The
2

ability to remain true to oneself seems to me to be not just an ultimate goal of our
political and social aspirations, but must begin with the ethical project of considering
how we can align a sense of ourselves with a sense of the world. This is the essence of
integrity, is it not: never having to split into a well-maintained “front” and a closely
guarded “inside”.
Creating community, in other words, involves this most difficult work of negotiating
real divisions, of considering boundaries before we go crashing through, and of
pondering our differences before we can ever agree on the terms of our sameness. For
the discounted vision of the Emperor’s new clothes - or a little boy’s colour - is
already the description of corrupted community.
Perhaps one reason that conversations about race are so often doomed to frustration is
that the notion of whiteness as ‘race’ is almost never implicated. One of the more
difficult legacies of slavery and of colonialism is the degree to which racism’s
tenacious hold is manifested not merely in the divided demographics of
neighbourhood or education or class, but also in the process of what media expert
John Fiske calls the “exnomination” of whiteness as racial identity. Whiteness is
unnamed, suppressed, beyond the realm of race. ‘Exnomination’ permits whites to
entertain the notion that race lives “over there”, on the other side of the tracks, in
black bodies and inner city neighbourhoods, in a dark netherworld where whites are
not involved.
At this level, the creation of a sense of community is a lifelong negotiation of endless
subtlety. One morning when my son was three, I took him to his pre-school. My son
ran straight to a pile of Lego and proceeded to work. I crossed the room and put his
lunchbox in the refrigerator where I encountered a little girl sitting at a table, beating a
mound of clay into submission with a plastic rolling pin. “I see a mummy,” she said
to me cheerfully. “That must mean your little boy is here somewhere too.” “Yes, he’s
here,” I answered, thinking how sweetly precocious she was. “There, he’s over by the
Lego.” She strained to see around the bookcases. “Oh yes,” she said. “Now I see that
black face of his.” I walked away without responding, enraged. And how can one be
so enraged at an innocent child? Yet not knowing what to say just then, rushing to get
the jaggedly dangerous broken glass of my emotions out of the room.
I remember being three so well. Three was the age when I learned that I was black,
the coloured kid, monkey child, different. What made me so angry and wordless in
this encounter forty years later was the realisation that none of the little white children
who taught me to see my blackness as a mark probably ever learned to see themselves
as white. In our culture, whiteness is rarely marked in the indicative “there, there!”
sense of my bracketed blackness. And that majoritarian privilege of never noticing
oneself was the beginning of an imbalance from which so much, so much else flowed.
But that is hard to talk about even now: this insight acquired before I had the words to
sort it out. Yet it is imperative to think about this phenomenon of closeting race,
which I believe is a good deal more widespread than these small examples. In a sense,
race matters are resented and repressed in much the same way as matters of sex and
scandal: the subject is considered a rude and transgressive one in mixed company; a
matter whose observation is sometimes inevitable, but about which, once seen, little
should be heard nonetheless. Race thus tends to be treated as though it were an
3

especially delicate category of social infirmity, so-called, like extreme obesity or
disfigurement.
Every parent knows a little of this dynamic, if in other contexts. “Why doesn’t that
lady have any teeth?” comes the child’s piping voice. “Why doesn’t that gentlemen
have any hair?” And “Why is that little boy so black?” “Ssssh!” comes the anxious
parental remonstrance. “The poor thing can’t help it. We must all pretend that
nothing’s wrong.” And thus we are coached upon pain of punishment not to see a
thing.
Now to be sure, the parent faces an ethical dilemma in that moment of childish vision
unrestrained by social nicety. On the one hand, we rush to place a limit on what can
be said to strangers and what must be withheld for fear of imposition or of hurting
someone’s feelings. As members of a broad society, we respect one another by
learning not to inflict every last intimate, prying curiosity we may harbour upon
everyone we meet.
That said, there remains the problem of how or whether we ever answer the question,
and that is the dimension of this dynamic that is considerably more troubling. “Why is
that man wearing no clothes, mummy?” pipes the childish voice once more. And the
parent panics at the complication of trying to explain. The naked man may be a nudist
or a psychotic or perhaps the Emperor of the Realm, but the silencing that is passed
from parent to child is not only about the teaching of restraint; it is calculated to
circumnavigate the question as though it had never been asked. “Stop asking such
silly questions.” A wall begins to grow around the forbidden gaze; for we all know,
and children best of all, when someone wants to change the subject, and forever. And
so the child is left to the monstrous creativity of ignorance and wild imagination.
Again, I do believe that this unfortunate negotiation of social difference has much in
common with discussions about race. Race is treated as though it were some sort of
genetic leprosy or a biological train wreck. Those who privilege themselves as “unraced” - usually, but not always, those who are white - are always anxiously
maintaining that it doesn’t matter even as they are quite busy feeling pity no less and
thankful to God for their great good luck in having been spared so intolerable an
affliction.
Meanwhile, those marked as “having race” are ground down by the pendular stresses
of having to explain what it feels like to be you - why are you black, why are you
black, why are you black? Over and over again. Or, alternatively, placed in a kind of
conversational quarantine of muteness in which any mention of racial circumstance
reduces all sides to tears, fears, fisticuffs and other paroxysms of unseemly anguish.
This sad, habitual paralysis in the face of the foreign and the anxiety-producing - it is
as though we are all skating across a pond that is not quite thoroughly frozen. Two
centuries ago, or perhaps only a few decades ago, the lake was solidly frozen; and if
for those skating across the surface things seemed much more secure, it was a much
more dismal lot for those whose fates were frozen at the bottom of the pond. Over
time, the weather of race relations has warmed somewhat, and some few of those at
the bottom have found their way to the surface. We no longer hold our breath, and we
have even learned to skate. The noisy racial chasm still yawns darkly beneath us all,
but we few brave souls glide gingerly above, upon a skim of hope, our bodies made
4

light with denial, the black pond so dangerously and thinly iced with the conviction
that talking about it will only make things worse.
And so the racial divide is exacerbated further by a welter of little lies that propel us
foolishly around the edges of our most demanding social stresses: black people are a
happy people; and if they would just stop complaining so much, they would see how
happy they are. Black people who say they’re unhappy are leftist agitators whose time
would be better spent looking for a real job. White people are victims. Poor
Bangladeshis are poor because they want to be. Poor white people are poor because
rich Indians stole all the jobs with the ruse of affirmative action. There is no racism in
the marketplace: “Each according to his merit,” goes the cant, even as the
Commission for Racial Equality receives 1700 formal complaints a month of racial
discrimination; even as top executives at Ford funnel the jobs to school chums and
their next of kin; or chief executives at major corporations like Texaco are captured
on tape destroying subpoenaed records of ongoing discriminatory practices.
Immigrants are taking over the whole world, but race makes no difference. If 60% of
young black men are unemployed in the industrialised world, well let them watch
Oprah. If some people are determined to be homeless, well let them have at it if
homelessness is what they like so much.
‘Triage’ is a word I hear bandied about a lot these days. I have heard it used by many
of my friends who are economists. They use it to convey an urgency of limited
resources. This word ‘triage’ originally cropped up in the context of the medical
profession. It’s a term borrowed from overtaxed hospitals in theatres of war. On bodystrewn battlefields doctors would divide the survivors into three groups. The third in
the worst condition might be left to die because bandages were better spent wrapped
around those more likely to survive.
I fear triage. I fear that one cannot cut off a third of the world without some awful,
life-threatening bleeding in the rest of the body politic. The Malthusian nightmare has
never been a simple matter, I think, of letting someone else go hungry or of letting
someone else die. It is a matter of amputation. That’s the metaphor I’d rather use. One
can’t cut off one’s leg and pretend it never belonged. It is as though we are employing
in our economic analysis of distributive justice, the images of the very earliest days of
medical experimentation: Oh well, let’s see now. The soul abides in the liver.
Therefore we can chop off that troublesome heretical head and no-one will be less
holy for it. Maybe, but quite a few martyrs have been made that way.
Anthropologist Michael Taussig has written about the phenomenon of public secrets.
He writes of a ritual in Tierra del Fuego in which the men come out of the men’s hut
wearing masks. The women hail them by singing, “Here come the spirits”. On some
level, everyone must know that these are not spirits, but husbands and brothers and
fathers and sons, but so powerful is the ritual to the sense of community that it is upon
pain of death that the women fail to greet them as spirits.
In our culture, I think that the power of race resembles just such a public secret. I
understand the civic ritual that requires us to say in the face of all our differences, we
are all one, we are the world. I understand the need for the publicly reiterated faith in
public ideals as binding and sustaining community. Such beliefs are the very
foundation of institutional legitimacy, and no society can hold itself together without
5

them. Yet such binding force comes from a citizenry willing to suspend disbelief for
the sake of honouring the spiritual power of our appointed ideals; and where
suspicion, cynicism and betrayal have eaten away at a community to the degree that
the folk parading from the men’s hut look like just a bunch of muggers wearing masks
- or badges, as the case may be - then hailing the spirit will sound like a hollow
incantation, empty theatre, the weary habit of the dispossessed.
There is a crisis of community in the United States no less than in the rest of the world
- of specific and complicated origin perhaps, but in this moment of global upheaval,
worth studying for possibilities both won and lost. Whites fear blacks; blacks fear
whites. Each is the enemy against whom the authorities will not act.
If racial and ethnic experience constitute a divide that cannot be spoken, an even
greater paradox is the degree to which a sense of commonality may be simultaneously
created, as well as threatened, by notions of ethnicity and race. It is no wonder we end
up deadlocked, as do so many of our most profound political problems. The O.J.
Divide, as it’s become known in America, is merely a convenient metaphor for
everything else we disagree about. Are you one of “us” or one of “them”? When I say
“we”, am I heard as referring only to other black people? When I employ the first
person, will it only be heard as an exercise of what might be called the royal “I” - me
as representative stand-in for all those of my kind?
Certainly the great, philosophically inspiring quandary of my life is that despite the
multiculturalism of my heritage and the profundity of my commitment to the notion
of the “us”-ness of us all, I have little room but to negotiate most of my daily lived
encounters as one of “them”. How alien this sounds - this split without, the split
within.
Yet in this way, the public secret of human fallibility, whose silence we keep to
honour our symbolic civic unity, is vastly complicated by the counter secret of
palpitating civil discord. Hail the spirit of our infallibly peaceful coexistence. Hail our
common fate, even as young white men are forming their own private militias
complete with grenade launchers and one in three young black men are in jail or on
probation. But, shush, don’t stare.
Such is the legacy of racism in the modern world. Perhaps it is less and less
fashionable these days to consider too explicitly the kinds of costs that slavery and
colonialism exacted, even as those historical disruptions have continued to scar
contemporary social arrangements with the transcendent urgency of their hand-medown grief.
I realise, therefore, that it might be considered impertinent to keep raising the ghost of
slavery’s triangle trade and waving it around; there is a pronounced preference in
police society for just letting bygones be bygones. And I concede that a more
optimistic enterprise might be to begin any contemporary analysis of race with the
Civil Rights Movement in the United States or the Notting Hill riots in the United
Kingdom. Beginning at those points is a way of focusing one’s view and confining
one’s reference to the legitimately inspiring ideals that coalesced those movements:
the aims of colour-blindness, equality of all people, and the possibility of peaceful coexistence.
6

Yet if that well-chosen temporal slice allows us to be optimistic about the possibility
of progress, there are nonetheless limitations to such a frame. First, it is the
conceptual pre-history of those movements that explains the toll of racism and its
lingering effects. There can be no adequate explanation without reference to it.
Secondly, the diasporic complexity of today’s social problems requires an analysis
that moves those ideals of the social movements of the 1960s and 70s beyond
themselves - into the present, into the future - to a more complex political grappling
with such phenomena as the hybridising of racial stereotypes with the
fundamentalisms of gender, class, ethnicity, religion. Thirdly, the problem of race is
overlaid with crises in environmental and resource management that have triggered
unparalleled migrations from rural to urban locations within national boundaries, and
that have impassioned debates about immigration across national boundary. Finally,
not a few aspects of our new age global economics - much like the commercial
profiteering of colonialisms past - threaten to displace not just the very laws to which
we persistently make such grand appeal, but the nation state itself. I believe that a
genuine long-term optimism about the future of race relations depends on a thorough
excavation of the same.
A memory slips into my mind. I was riding from New York to Washington DC some
years ago. I was on my way to some lawyers’ conference or other. I was accompanied
by two black colleagues. An hour into the trip, the train stopped in the city of
Philadelphia. A young white woman got on whom my colleagues knew. She was also
a lawyer, headed to the same conference. She joined us, sitting among us in a double
row of seats that faced each other. A little while later, the conductor came along. The
new woman held up her ticket, but the conductor did not seem to see her. He saw four
of us seated and only three ticket stubs. “One of you hasn’t paid,” he said, staring at
me, then at each of my two black friends. I remember pointing to the white woman
and someone else said, “Over there.” But the conductor was resolute: “Which one of
you hasn’t paid?” he asked again. Two of us kept saying, “Our receipts. See?” And
the white woman, speaking very clearly, said, “Here, I am trying to give you my
ticket.” The conductor was scowling. The conductor still did not hear. “I am not
moving till one of you pays up.” It was the longest time before the conductor stopped
staring in all the wrong directions. It was the longest time before he heard the new
woman, pressing her ticket upon him, her voice reaching him finally as though from a
great distance, passing through light years of understanding as though from another
universe. The realisation that finally lit his face was like the dawning of a great
surprise.
How precisely does the issue of colour remain so powerfully determinative of
everything from life circumstance to manner of death in a world that is by and large
officially colour-blind? What metaphors mask the hierarchies that make racial
domination frequently seem so natural, so invisible, indeed so attractive? How does
racism continue to evolve post-slavery and post-equality legislation across such
geographic, temporal and political distance?
No, I am not saying that this is the worst of times, but neither will I concede that this
is the best of all possible worlds. And what a good thing, is it not, to try to imagine
how much better we could be?

7

“I had a dream,” said my son the other morning. Then he paused. “No,” he said, “it
was more of a miracle. Do you know what a miracle is?” “Tell me,” I said,
thunderstruck and breathless with maternal awe. “A miracle is where you have a
dream and you open your eyes in it. It’s when you wake up and your dream is all
around you.” It was a pretty good definition, I thought. And even though my son’s
little miracle had something to do with pirates meeting dinosaurs, I do think that to a
very great extent we dream our worlds into being. For better or worse, our customs
and laws, our culture and society are sustained by the myths we embrace, the stories
we circulate to explain what we behold.
I believe that racism’s hardy persistence and immense adaptability are sustained by a
habit of human imagination, deflective rhetoric and hidden licence. I believe no less
that an optimistic course might be chartered, if only we could imagine it. What a
world it would be if we could all wake up and see all of ourselves reflected in the
world - not merely in a territorial sense, but with a kind of non-exclusive entitlement
that grants not so much possession as investment. A peculiarly anachronistic notion of
investment, I suppose, at once both ancient and futuristic; an investment that
envisions each of us in each other.

8

