REITH LECTURES 1997: The Genealogy of Race
Patricia Williams
Lecture 2: The Pantomime of Race
TRANSMISSION: 4 March 1997 – BBC Radio 4

If race is something about which we dare not speak in polite society, the same cannot
be said of the viewing of race. How, or whether, blacks are seen depends upon a
dynamic of display that ricochets between hyper visibility and oblivion. Blacks are
seen everywhere, taking over the world one minute; yet the great ongoing toll of
poverty and isolation that engulfs so many people remains the object of persistent
oversight.
If, moreover, the real lives of real blacks unfold outside the view of many whites, the
fantasy of black life as a theatrical enterprise is an almost obsessive indulgence. This
sort of voyeurism is hardly peculiar to the mechanics of racial colonisation, of course;
any group designated the ‘colourful local’, the ‘bangled native’ or ‘the folksy ethnic’
stands to suffer its peculiar limitation. But since it is racial voyeurism that has
produced some of the biggest visual blockbusters of the century, one might as well
begin there.
Consider, if you will indulge me, for what I promise will be just a moment of
exquisitely bad taste: the lurid babble that has been O.J. Simpson mania. It might be
aversion, I suppose, of that great conversation about race we Americans are always
telling ourselves we’re going to have, albeit a conversation waged in a fan danced
pantomime of naked revelations followed by quick flutters of denial; words and
images on completely different wavelengths at constant war in a swirling mush of
conflictual, so-called, information.
‘Race, sex, miscegenation!’ screamed the front page photos. ‘No race, no class, just
the American way of colour-blind justice’, demurely intoned so many of the sober
wordsmiths and solemn television anchormen.
Those who did talk about race - blacks by and large - were denounced grandly, not on
substantive grounds but for ever having imagined the subject into existence. This
scripted denial ultimately allowed visual images to remain in the realm of the
unspoken. The unsaid, filled by stereotypes and self-identifying illusion; the
hierarchies of race and gender circulating unchallenged - this is the stuff of which
obsession is formed.
I suppose I must say a little more about the Simpson phenomenon. There is perhaps
no better example of the degree to which the cultural appetite for spicy brews of race,
sex and crime has deployed real courts to its own amusing little ends. But engaging as
that drama became, so was it draining. It was certainly among the most exceptional
spectacles in media history, and I am loathe to be one of those who would draw
general lessons from a case that resembles nothing ever before seen on the planet
Earth. It provided no insight at all about what ordinary black or white defendants
1

encounter in the criminal justice system, and yet it seems to me that the function of its
obsessive hold was to create an imaginary window on what is thought to occur in the
average courtroom to the average black defendant.
And that, I think, is the basis for so much of what chafes at the racial divide in
discussions of this case: white people tended to imagine that this case was about
hoards of guilty black defendants with fifteen attorneys going scot-free; and in trying
to counter that impression, black people too tended to talk about Mr Simpson as
though he were all black defendants.
While the bounds of fiction and non-fiction have always been blurred when it comes
to our affection for a good whodunnit, the Simpson case became one, long serial
story, a chain novel with no threat of enduring social edification; a thicket of tragic
possibilities and inexhaustible sub-plots; a graveyard of alternative theories,
ultimately decomposing towards sensory overload and infinity.
As an aside, I do think that if that trial provides a window into any kind of cultural
meaning, we had better look to the way in which the panicky urgency of race
overshadows the matter of class. That is, the contemporary licence granted the very
wealthy or the very famous.
While many have blamed the acquittal upon the race of some of the jurors, it should
not be forgotten that Americans have always been reticent to convict the very rich or
the very famous. There has always been a certain conceptual overlap among the lavish
forms of defence that wealth can buy, the transfixing aura of celebrity, and the golden
glow of presumptive innocence.
But while we are so drenched in the passions of racial exorcism attending the
Simpson case, it is instructive to take a quick peek into the courtrooms where the
dramas of two other wealthy former sports heroes have unfolded rather more quietly.
Mr Alex Kelly, a wealthy white athlete accused of raping a high school classmate,
fled the United States and, with the financial assistance of his well-to-do parents,
lived lavishly abroad, hopping from one European ski resort to another for ten years
before he was found. His trial ended in a hung jury despite eyewitnesses and lots of
bloodstained evidence. The jury was - gasp - all white. Would it reveal much, I
wonder, to bewail this outcome as showing how supposedly partial are white people
in judging one of their own?
Similarly, Mr John du Pont, heir to the massive du Pont fortune, who for years drove
around his toney neighbourhood in an armoured tank bristling with sophisticated
weaponry, with the full knowledge of local authorities, I might add; Mr John du Pont
who in the presence of witnesses shot and killed an Olympic wrestling champion
living on the grounds of his estate - if we wish to obsess about the vagaries of our
justice system, this seems as fair a case as any.
What irony. When we last heard from the du Pont family, it was from his brother, Mr
Pete du Pont, who was quoted in the National Review saying that “the minimum wage
turns out to be one of our leading killers. It’s time to stop it before it kills again”. In
fact, if we really wanted equality of legal circus, perhaps we should have round the
2

clock coverage of either of the Monsieurs du Pont walking toward the courthouse in
slow motion while a little Greek chorus of black experts chanted lamentations about
how white people have corrupted the moral fibre of our civilisation.
Is it any less absurd to think of O.J. Simpson as representative of the morals of all
black people than to judge all white people by the murderous belligerence of a John
du Pont?
I offer these rather crude reversals because perhaps they highlight this peculiarly
pornographic seeing of race in the Simpson case - the near-sighted, unblinking,
focused gaze that in the United States was signalled by the television networks
cancelling coverage of the first World Cup to be held in the United States, so that
helicopter cameras could train spotlights upon Mr Simpson’s flight from the police, or
that was signalled by Time magazine’s cover photo of Mr Simpson with his skin
airbrushed darker so as to achieve what they seemed to think was a certain demonic
drama.
I bother to mention any of this because I long ago discarded the notion that the
Simpson case was merely a contained domestic embarrassment. I have found myself
called to account for this bizarre spectacle by taxi drivers in London, friends in
France, tourists from Turkey. A Chinese American student of mine, describing her
most recent visit to family in Hong Kong, found that her most memorable encounter
was in a McDonald’s restaurant where a big screen television had been installed and
crowds of Hong Kong teenagers sat soberly ingesting Big Macs, French fries, and that
day’s slow motion replays of the trial of the century.
Does voyeurism even begin to capture the intensity of this cultural moment - this
ultimate test of the bounds between fact and fiction, fiction and fixation, fixation and
the religious fervour of an outright passion play?
In any case, for all the spectacularly lurid razzle of the Simpson case, there are quieter
instances of racial voyeurism that are perhaps at least as telling. For example, in black
neighbourhoods around the United States - but most particularly in well-known
communities like Harlem New York - busloads of tourists flock to black churches
upon a Sunday morning, or any other time for that matter, gate crashing baptisms and
choir practice, prayer groups and funerals. The New York Times covered the
phenomenon not long ago: caravans of Swedes and Japanese and Dutch and
Brazilians fighting with congregants for good seats, straining for the perfect camera
angles, hunkering down for a good show. It’s great theatre, according to the
guidebook List of Hits: all those black people dressed up in their quaint finery singing
and swooning and singing some more.
In order to understand fully the impact of such a phenomenon, it might help to
imagine a village church in a small, homogenous locale in Middle England. Imagine
that 400 of, oh say me - 400 Americans, 400 black people, either or both, take your
pick - we show up outnumbering the congregation; well-meaning, surely, except
perhaps for the chewing gum, the flashbulbs and those Bruce Springsteen t-shirts.
I first encountered this phenomenon some years ago when I went on a walking tour of
Harlem, supposedly to view the architectural idiosyncrasies of the neighbourhood.
3

The guide proposed quite casually that we drop in on some churches to ‘see the
show’. There was a meandering quality to the suggestion: we could go here, we could
go there; we could look at the marble detailing a block north; we could look at the
people praying a block south. The people praying were on a par with the marble
detailing - there for the observation. There was no thought of invitation or indirection,
no fear of transgression. A presumption of right to be there, if anything, for when I
objected that it didn’t seem appropriate to treat a congregation as just another
monument, I was told that “no-one would mind”. I took it to mean that no-one they
felt obligated to listen to had told them they would mind. I could not help thinking of
property accounts taken during the time of slavery in which slaves were listed along
with the furniture: two beds, four armchairs, one mahogany armoire, three
antimacassars, one parlour maid.
There’s a long tradition of religion being the window through which culture is
observed and learned, but there is also a long tradition of voyeurism as a means of
putting culture not just on display but at a condescending distance. My father, who
grew up in the segregated South, recalls this phenomenon even as he was growing up.
Whites would come for the thrill of the purportedly boisterous carryings on in black
churches. He describes how it would inhibit the sense of communion, of joy and
release - this one way gaze of the soberly disengaged in whose world you would
never be permitted the intimacy of such study.
In deference to the unbidden visitors, the congregations would strain for greater
decorum, so as not to be the objects of anything that felt like mockery, that felt like
ridicule.
But what makes the church a house of God is a question of faith. What transports
those who form a congregation to the shared catharsis that is holy communion is the
willingness to suspend disbelief. Imagine how hard it is to maintain that sense of
intimacy and vulnerability when 400 tourists show up late, and stay long enough to
hear three rousing gospel songs but not so long as to endanger lunch reservations at
the South Street Seaport. Imagine that they all get up during the children’s offering
and 400 strong crash their way toward the exits. Imagine how hard it is to hear above
that din the warbly little voices of the children, so young, so brave and so insulted.
Imagine how hard it becomes to suspend cynicism, never mind disbelief. This drives
people to draw bounds where none ought to be.
I would ask you to imagine too how hard it is to draw any kind of boundary around a
house of worship. How do you distinguish at the door the spiritual seeker from the
thrill seeker? Indeed those churches that have expressed their unwillingness to
continue to entertain tour groups still receive as many as 200 individually motivated
tourists (in some instances) on any given Sunday. Moreover, those same churches,
having attempted to impose some sorts of limits on attendance and decorum, have
faced charges of being racist, separatist, nationalist, and of course that great all-time
favourite politically correct.
It is a dilemma surely for the extraction from such tension relies upon the restraint of
the tourist, of the anthropological instinct that lends such sense of entitlement to the
project of studying those whose willingness to be studied is assumed as given.

4

In the grip of such blissful entitlement - what a surprise, the eruption of anti-colonial
fundamentalism, what a shock. How irrational and after all we’ve done for them,
paying good money to come see them and the nostalgia of their charming culture.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the fence, consider the seductive temptations of other
dangerous rationales. For when we are pushed to the limit, forced to the insistence on
boundary, this is a step toward fundamentalism - for what is fundamentalism in its
most inchoate sense but the felt necessity for a hard, bright line between those who
are true believers and those others: those infidels who are known for their
transgression.
While the interest in black churches may be good, may be welcome in many senses, I
worry that in important ways it signals the practice of disinterest. One Sunday, for
example, I rather boldly asked a young French tourist whether she had thought about
having worn tennis shorts to a church. “But we’re going to play tennis afterwards,”
she replied, with a fetching little pout of astonishment that implied I had said
something quite stupid indeed. What on earth was I suggesting wearing a dress to play
tennis? When I drooped visibly at this response, she grew somewhat abashed. “But
everyone goes dressed like this,” she said. By “everyone” she apparently meant other
French tourists. Everyone did not mean me; it did not include the congregants. She
went on to rationalise the tennis togs with a fine display of the craft of projecting
one’s own self-interest onto the world at large. “They are mostly very poor people
anyway” - again apparently exceptionalising me. “There are a lot of homeless people
who attend. They’d be uncomfortable if we did get dressed up.” Such is the prattle of
the invested voyeur. Such is the happily insular comfort of the Safari adventure, the
ambling browse through the living museum, the stalking of wildlife forms, the thrill
of capturing authentic natural phenomena, the safe rapture yet the distant danger of
coming so close to the lost link, the primitive origins of some more innocent
beginning.
And so the pilgrimage to the tribal enclosure, cameras in hand - the image, if not
exactly stuffed, rendered two-dimensional: the flat, dry matted photographic relic to
be spread out upon the coffee tables of faraway homes, the open-mouthed exotics
frozen in raucous song, glazed in a bath of light from the high beamed cameras, the
startled prey bagged with a click of a blazing hot flashbulb.
Like tigers, I would guess, real un-tethered blacks would never be invited into these
homes of the hunter. Maybe someone who had the room for a menagerie - but for the
average tourist, well bringing home such a prize is simply too expensive; and, besides,
the neighbours might complain.
Alas, am I too cynical? Let me ask the question more straightforwardly: is it really the
experience of religious communion that is retained by all those camera toting tourists?
It is my fear that for all the stated aspiration, it is not an appreciation of black culture
that is carried away on film and tape, but an appropriation - and a shallow one at that.
I am thinking of an Hawaiian friend of mine who went to college on the mainland,
who described her sense of confusion upon attending a fraternity party with a socalled Hawaiian theme. Random cultural objects were strewn about the room with no
5

rhyme or reason. It took her a long time to realise that there was no rhyme or reason;
the things just looked Hawaiian, nothing more.
I think a factor of major importance in all of this is one’s relation to images of the
alluring and the bestial, of civilisation and the savage. Cultural domination of any sort
- and most particularly racial domination - is facilitated by powerful erotic archetypes
in which deep prejudices are felt rather than reasoned and thereby naturalised rather
than beheld.
These archetypes or stereotypes so control the limits of imagination that even
conscious attempts to explore the foreign other become rather too easily derailed. The
quest to embrace cultures other than one’s own degenerate into a taste for the fauve
and the primitive, fiercely cooptive rather than appreciate of other worlds.
There are always, I suppose, a few exotics who maybe admitted to the inner circle those well paid few who teach the upper classes how to dance that dance and paint
that paint; but too often and too soon the circle closes back upon itself, congratulating
itself for its mastery of the foreign, always preferring familiar drama to the risks of
serious democratisation.
This erotic boundary between the desired and the undesirable, forming such an
insistently closed circle of self-regard, nevertheless offers itself up as universal - the
created prison of expectation never quite permitting the shock of intimate surprise;
never a glimpse into the realm of the unknown, the un-prepossessed, the
unprejudiced.
Let me try to make this point with a somewhat different emphasis, restated again as an
ethical challenge. Philosophers from Aristotle to Hannah Arendt have spoken of the
condition of “being one”. In its most literal sense, the ability to be one person rather
than two refers to some resolution of the ethically dangerous position of one who
finds oneself split between the ‘one’ one is and the ‘one’ one feels one has to be: the
sheltered self and the masquerade.
A black friend of mine describes a situation that I think exemplifies this split. When
her firm first hired her, all the new associates were taken to lunch at an exclusive
private club that had, until only shortly before, barred blacks, Jews and women as
members. She found herself the only black person seated at the table while all the
servers were black. She found herself on what she called “a razor’s edge of social
consciousness”. She was supposed to be enjoying the fruits of her professional
success. She was, she knew, supposed to display some subtle mixture of wit, grace
and gratitude. Yet sitting at that table, engaged in conversation about corporate
mergers while acknowledging the ‘help’, only by the quiet sway of her body from
right to left as the plates came and went, felt to her like “ignoring my family”, as she
put it.
To review the ingredients thus far, for black people the systematic, often nonsensical
denial of racial experiences engenders a sense of split identity attending that which is
obvious but inexpressible; an assimilative tyranny of neutrality as self-erasure. It
creates an environment in which one cannot escape declining symbolism of oneself.
This is heightened, by contrast, to all the silent, shifty discomfort of suffering
6

condescension. There’s that clunky social box larger than your body taking up all that
space. You need two chairs at the table: one for you, one for your blackness.
For white people, moreover, racial denial tends to engender a profoundly invested
disingenuousness, an innocence that amounts to the transgressive refusal to know.
Again this is not to assign anything like blame, simply to observe the way in which
we know race or don’t.
In the wake of that club luncheon, for example, my lawyer friend mentioned her sense
of distress at the social imbalance of the event to one of her colleagues. She was
instantly suffused with apologies. Neither my friend, nor I, is so cynical to doubt her
sincerity, yet both of us confessed to a weariness with such apologies. Both of us had
been in so very many situations where white people just didn’t know, had just never
thought about it. At some point the flow of apologies begins to feel like a gulf of false
empathy. At some point a suspicion sets in of the wistful giftiness with which not
knowing is offered; the great admission of vulnerability that is an invitation to more
work for you: “Do tell me all about it” - the guilty childishness that never dreamed of
such a thing. “How awful it must be for you and how terrible I feel now that I know.”
All the while a kind of pleading behind the eyes, a twisting of nervously clutched
hankies and the anxious call to colour-blindness. Would that you would just not know
too.
Again, I do not want to disparage the sincerity of such conversations, only their
superficiality and the troublesomeness of that reiterated emptiness. How can it be that
so many well-meaning white people have never thought about race when so few
blacks pass a single day without being reminded of it? How is it that the very
suggestion that white people think about it is considered a bad or a burdensome thing
as though there could never be a good or constructive insight from it - as though the
excitation of too much thought about race could drive one howling into the abyss?
Better just to pluck out one’s eyeballs, I suppose.
So it is not merely the silence about racism that presents problems, but its aesthetic
visual power as well. I believe that racial representations in popular culture present a
most urgent concern in a society as relentlessly bombarded with visual images as our
own. Visual symbolism has begun to rival spoken or printed words as the medium by
which our sense of cultural tradition is to be carried forward. The globally pervasive
manipulation of the vocabulary of visual images is why I think that talking about our
differences or conversation by itself cannot begin to be adequate. It can’t work in this
age of television and film if, for example, we proceed to converse about crime, say,
our words as neutral as can be; yet at some deep collectively unconscious level we
share a vision of a black, but not a white criminal, or vice versa.
It is tribute to the power of television perhaps that the very tiny minority of black and
Asian people in Great Britain - five percent - is the focus of such immense anxiety to
so many in the remaining ninety-five percent. The dimension of race, the proportion
of race, the numbers of race become inflated, exaggerated, distorted, enlarged. Five
percent becomes a thousand percent in the infinitely multiplying, endlessly replaced
hallucinations of the television hall of mirrors.

7

It is in this way, perhaps, that the project of inclusion is felt as one of takeover; that
the goal of equality comes to be seen as favouritism; that the travails of so few
become the scapegoat for so many.
In order to make sense of our cyclical racial passion plays, in other words, we need to
pull together a comprehensive analysis of words and images in both high and low
culture, in both major and minor traditions of literature, sociology and law. Why can
we not speak of race but only mutter and groan? Why can we not look at the problem
but only peer at it with the overcharged currents of pornography?
Examining the extent to which the stakes in whiteness impassion so many of our race
rituals may be one way of reclaiming a coherent connection between our free floating
mythological fears and their consequence: the actual data of racial anxiety, division
and violence.
My compatriot Henry Louis Gates wrote an intriguing piece in the New Yorker
magazine not long ago. It was about Anatole Broyard, a light-skinned black man who
passed as a white man for most of his adult life. Since Broyard was well-known in the
United States as an editor of the New York Times Book Review, it came as a rude
shock to many when Gates’ article revealed the truth.
I suppose that this case could be an example of the assimilative pressures that so
conspire to create a more sophisticated version of what I call the Michael Jackson
syndrome of self-elimination. But Gates raises a harder conundrum posed by
Broyard’s situation: Anatole Broyard, he says, wanted to be a writer, not a black
writer, so he chose to live a lie rather than be trapped by the truth.
Where is the space, I wonder, between the lived lie and the trap of the truth? What do
we look like when we try to inhabit the shades of grey? Are we driven beyond
ourselves when we set out just to be ourselves? Black or white, invisible or
conspicuous, English or British, raced or nationed, embodied or alone - who are we
when we are seen but not spotlighted, when we are humble but not invisible, when we
matter but not so much that the mattering drives us mad?

8

