REITH LECTURES 1998: War in Our World
John Keegan
Lecture 4: War and the Individual
TRANSMISSION: 24 April 1998 – BBC Radio 4

“Every man”, said Dr Johnson, “thinks meanly of himself for not having been a
soldier or not having been at sea”. This thought is often misquoted as “Every man
thinks better of himself for having been a soldier”. Either way, we know what he
meant: it is a rare man who does not think better of himself for having served in
whatever capacity, and even if he has not faced gunfire.
This is particularly so in Britain where the ethos of the squadron, the ship’s company
and above all the small regimental community is strong. The reunions of those who
fought in the Second World War have attracted larger numbers even as the war has
grown more distant. The fiftieth anniversaries of the D-Day invasion that liberated
Europe, and of the culminating peace of 1945, brought record turnouts. They also
brought the cheers of the multitude and the private congratulations of family and
friends. Old soldiers and sailors and airmen were indeed cause to think better of
themselves, often by members of a generation which has no memory of the war at all.
So far in previous lectures, I have explored the origins of war and the changing role of
the state in its prosecution. Yet the role of individuals in warfare and the impact of
war upon them deserves greater attention, and it is to them that I turn in this fourth
lecture.
There are special reasons for the high standing in which veterans are held in Britain:
they are the men and women who first averted defeat - how close did defeat loom in
1940 - and then brought total victory over a monstrous tyranny. It was a victory
moreover not won at the wicked cost in lives of the First World War. The losses were
grievous enough - nearly 400,000 deaths in battle - but fewer by nearly half than those
of 1914-18.
The grief of the bereaved moreover was alleviated by the value of the sacrifice. “They
did not die in vain” is for once a form of words not empty of meaning; while the
extraordinary gracious way the British have found of commemorating each individual
who died, in the mysteriously beautiful war cemeteries maintained around the globe,
is in itself a comfort to the nation’s widows and orphans.
The Russians, who lost 10 million in battle, have no such comfort. The reunions of
their veterans are still haunted by men and women seeking any scrap of news of sons
or husbands who disappeared without trace at Stalingrad or Kursk 50 years ago.
The lot of the German war generation, however little sympathy they deserve, is worse
by far: Stalin ordered the systematic destruction of every German war grave on Soviet
soil where most of Germany’s 4 million lost soldiers fell, while those who survived

1

rarely find reason for reunion. They have nothing to celebrate and much, including
dishonour, to forget.
Yet even the old men who were Hitler’s soldiers escape individual dishonour. They
were patriotic in their time and are honoured for that by their countrymen; and they
were usually brave, as their enemies freely admit. They benefit from the indulgence
granted by the human heart to all young men of the 20th century whom the state
plucked from peaceful life, put into uniform, and sent to do an often fatal duty. The
idea of the common soldier of whatever country, of whatever war as victim is strong
in our culture, and with reason: war has in our time chosen many victims, but none so
numerous as the ordinary soldier himself.
The idea of the soldier as victim would have been quite alien to many of our ancestors
for much of history; they would simply not have understood what grounds Dr Johnson
thought the military or naval life gave to men for thinking better of themselves. He,
we may guess, conceived the soldier or sailor (and he probably meant officers in any
case) to be an individual who voluntarily accepted the risk of death as a duty within a
strictly disciplined service. The Red Coat Army, the Blue Jacket Navy of the 18th
century flogged and hanged without mercy when its code was broken, and the
breaches of law it punished with violence included rape and looting as well as mutiny.
To the inhabitants of the Spanish Netherlands during The Eighty Years War, to the
inhabitants of Germany in The Thirty Years War, to the inhabitants of France during
The Hundred Years War, rape and looting were what the approach of an army
portended.
The soldier was a hated figure in Medieval and Renaissance Europe as the paintings
of Bruegel and the engravings of Callow graphically portray. A despised one also.
Soldiers ate and drank at the common peoples’ expense uncontrolled by their officers
and were a rough riding lot who took what they chose, including sexual favours, paid
for nothing and, if opposed, tortured and killed. When the common people got their
chance of revenge, they took it. Callow’s series of engravings divides equally into
scenes of atrocity by soldiers against civilians and of reprisals by civilians against
soldiers when stragglers fell into their clutches. The image of the soldier as criminal
or oppressor belongs moreover to most times and places.
The Roman soldiers of the New Testament - men under authority as Christ’s dialogue
with the centurion reminds us - supplied not merely his torturers and executioners;
but, if St Paul’s appeal to soldiers not to commit extortion conveys anything about
their behaviour, blackmailers and robbers as well.
Why for so long and in so many places was the individual soldier hated and despised?
Hated because he misbehaved, of course; despised because he was usually a person
plucked from the lowest ranks of society, a man unable to make an honest living or
someone who put himself beyond the bounds of honesty by fathering an illegitimate
child he could not support by committing theft or murder. Enlistment offered him an
escape from the law - armies being unfussy about accepting recruits who were
usefully brutal, as long as they would thereafter submit to the brutal rules of
obedience armies themselves imposed. The soldier was regarded as being particularly
low in the sophisticated society of China where his status equated with that of
prostitutes and criminals.
2

Even in Victorian Britain, which tolerated no civil misbehaviour by Tommy Atkins,
the common soldier was a social outcast. Since he was forbidden to marry without
permission - and in any case earned too little to support a wife - he could not belong
to respectable society. “I would rather see you buried than in a red coat”, wrote the
mother of William Robertson, a future field marshal, when he gave up a position as a
domestic servant to go for a soldier.
How then had Dr Johnson taken the view that men could think better of themselves
for having been a soldier? It is not too difficult to solve the conundrum. The
possession of superior force is a perpetual temptation to behave badly, and we lack no
evidence of that from our newspapers and television screens. The strong sometimes
kill the weak as if by rule of human nature and can actually be stimulated to kill by
the victim’s weakness. My friend Don McCullin - the great war photographer, a
witness of terrible scenes of massacre in Lebanon and elsewhere - gives it as his
opinion that the attempt to reason with armed men bent on murder positively
discourages them to feel pity.
There is, however, a contrary principle in human nature, one which we also recognise
as an apparently universal rule. That is that the use of force by the strong against the
weak is an intrinsically repellent activity; typically it brings remorse. We define the
psychopath as a being incapable of remorse. Equally typically, the desire to avoid the
occasion of remorse translates both in the individual and in the culture to which he
belongs into the ethic of fair fight. Sport supplies an analogy: winning teams take no
satisfaction in defeating known losers. They seek a contest between equals - glory in
victory if they achieve it; acquiesce in honourable defeat if they do not.
It is the idea of military honour that explains Dr Johnson’s judgement. The pursuit of
honour in battle has very ancient origins, not unnaturally, for they lie deep in the
human psyche. Even in the comparatively bloodless ritual battles of primitives, young
men competed to be seen taking risk. In more complex societies, the pursuit of risk
becomes entangled with that of social standing itself in two directions. Successful
warriors acquire superior weapons. So equipped, they seek to do battle only with
those similarly armed. In Bronze Age China, charioteers, we are told, despised
fighting common foot soldiers, choosing to pit themselves if possible against enemy
charioteers alone.
The Iliad, the most influential story of war in Western literature, is almost exclusively
about honour. Not only do the Greeks go to Troy on a matter of honour. Once arrived,
their champions are spurred to fight the Trojan champions as much for honour as for
victory itself.
Yet the Homeric ideal of honour would seem gravely defective to the modern
professional soldier; indeed to his knightly and aristocratic predecessors. The victor in
the Homeric dual showed no respect for his vanquished foe whatsoever. The passage
in which Achilles exults as he drags the body of the fallen hector behind his chariot is
perhaps the most horrifying in the horrific story of the Iliad. Honour could be savage,
as reports by Christian missionaries of the tests of courage inflicted by the North
3

American Indians on their proud captives all too vividly portray. It was only when the
practice of honour came to be palliated by a higher moral code - particularly that of
Christianity itself - that the warrior learnt to honour his enemy even in defeat.
Chivalry began quite late in the history of Christian Europe as a code for the rich
alone, and it undoubtedly came eventually to influence the behaviour in battle of the
poor warrior as much as it did that of his social superior.
The rules requiring decent treatment of all prisoners irrespective of rank, for example,
were already widely observed by professional armies in the 18th century. What
outraged European officers of both sides during the Franco-British wars in North
America was that the allied Indians tortured captured common soldiers, though not
officers, in flagrant violation of what were by then civilised standards.
By the late 19th century - much, though by no means exclusively, influenced by the
humanitarian Geneva Convention - European armies enforced elaborate codes of
correct behaviour, which were accepted as a matter of course by the rank and file. Not
only European armies. The Samurai class, which officered Japan’s new Western style
army, had imposed its own knightly code of honour on the peasant recruits. It was
only in the 1930s when fanatically nationalist officers took charge that the Japanese
armed forces began deliberately to brutalise recruits in training with the object of
filling them with hate that would then be turned on foreigners. Tens of thousands of
allied prisoners of war suffered the consequences. So did millions of Chinese.
I spoke in an earlier lecture of the militarization of Europe in the 19th century. That
was an undoubted fact of the continent’s development as it was of Japan’s
westernisation. The product was the vast armies that marched to war in 1914 - armies
disciplined for battle, but also in a code of decent military behaviour. The code
worked: apart from an early and short passage of deliberate frightfulness by the
Germans in Belgium, the armies of the Great War did not commit atrocities either
against each other or against civilians. They did not rape, nor loot, nor mistreat
wounded or prisoners, nor behave in any way at all as both the Catholic and Protestant
armies had done in Germany during The Thirty Years War. What we know of our
own British expeditionary force helps to explain why.
The code by then had sunk civilian as well as military routes. The volunteer battalions
that went off to die on the Somme in 1916, under the half-comic names they had
chosen for themselves - Church Lads, Glasgow Tramways, Accrington Powells, First
Football - were the creations not only of a surge of patriotic emotion, but also of
Victorian respectability and all its agencies: church, chapel, workplace, close-knit
industrial town and athletic fraternity.
It is odd to reflect, but true nonetheless, that the British working class men who went
off to the Great War had quite unselfconsciously chosen as their boyhood leisure
reading if not The Boy’s Own Paper - perhaps too expensive for their pockets - then
something quite like it, something suffused with the idea of fair play; the honour of
the school; doing the decent thing; and standing up for the weak and the weaker sex.
The regular officers who commanded them had no need to teach the code of honour
they had learnt at their public schools and at Woolwich and Sandhurst. It was already
4

implanted in the volunteers’ breasts. Equivalent codes possessed the armies of France,
Germany, Austria, Hungary and Russia, even if in a more institutionally religious than
secular form. It was the idea of honour and its associated ideals of duty and selfsacrifice that supplied the energy of the First World War. With what terrible effect:
earlier and different societies recognised the implausibility of the attempt to make
every man a soldier, as Europe tried to do in 1914 and again in 1939.
Primitive societies may have expected all males to be warriors. Most, the exceptional
hard primitives accepted, took care to wage war in a way that did not try their
warriors too hard. Historically developed societies have recognised that the life of the
soldier is not for the many. It requires qualities not only of physical strength and
endurance, but of emotional robustness found only in the few.
Rich commercial societies in consequence often hired mercenaries or regulars to do
their fighting for them: Islam, by origin the most militant of polities, eventually went
to the edge of the steppe to buy hard nomads to defend its borders; the tsars enlisted
their surplus serfs; Frederick the Great kidnapped to man his armies; George III
rented armies intact from the smaller German states to fight his rebellious American
subjects.
Only in recent times, only really in the 20th century have states reverted to the
practice of the Greek cities and obliged all male citizens to go to war. Many proved
quite unsuited to the responsibility. Why was that? Because of the duration of modern
wars for one thing. It may surprise many - although it should not have really been
forgotten - the Greek wars were very short: a day of battle at the most. And that the
battles were short too: an hour of killing in which one side or the other was broken,
the losers fled home and the victors buried the dead.
The great 20th century wars lasted for years and battles for month after month.
Verdun, usually cited as the worst battle of the 20th century, lasted from February to
November 1916 and many French soldiers were ordered to the battlefield several
times over. Those who survived repeated exposure to wounds or death - and two out
of nine French soldiers who went to war were killed - passed through successive
moods of resignation, fatalism and eventual despair. In the spring of 1917, when the
number of French deaths in action equalled that of the strength of the French Army on
mobilisation, the army’s resolution broke: over half of its divisions joined a military
strike, the men announcing their unwillingness to attack again. There were similar
breakdowns of morale in the Italian and Russian Armies later in the year and in the
German Army in 1918, all of which had suffered comparable casualties.
The protraction of war had in short undermined the individual’s essential belief in the
statistical probability of his own survival - a calculation that it won’t be me. At the
same time, the experience of the individual (as long as he survived) was nastier than
ever before, measured in terms of noise, general insecurity, and the spectacle of the
wounds inflicted by modern weapons, including burns and multiple fragmentation
effects. War had got longer; it had also got worse. The outcome was a rising incidence
of psychological casualties - a phenomenon largely denied during the First World
War, but necessarily recognised during the Second.

5

We must rephrase Dr Johnson: every man would think better of himself for having
been a soldier could he bear the strain. Large minorities of mass armies, it has been
revealed in our time, cannot. Individuals crack under fear, sometimes the anticipation
of fear, and so do whole units - particularly those formed of an army’s second or third
choice of personnel. The recent trend for the armed forces of developed states to shed
numbers reflects not only the economic difficulty of maintaining and equipping the
totality of manpower available for service; it also reflects their acceptance of the
doubtful utility of large numbers themselves. In retrospect, I would argue that the
function of the large armies of the First World War was chiefly to act as a medium
through which the imposition of heavy casualties would inflict pain on the civilian
populations that supported the war.
I spoke in my first lecture of the telegraph boy on his bicycle pedalling the suburban
street, who became for parents and wives literally an omen of terror. Even in the
Second World War, when technological development and industrial expansion could
equip more of the mass with weapons designed to counter enemy weapons, the role of
the many was simply to fill space as targets for the enemies’ firepower. It is only in
our own time that the pointlessness of opposing military machinery with men who
have lacked such machinery has become fully apparent. It was demonstrated beyond
argument in the Gulf War of 1991 when the mood possessing the pathetically under
equipped Iraqi Army was to capitulate as soon as signs of surrender could be safely
displayed.
War and the individual, we may recognise, are parting company. Only in unusual
circumstances - remote both in place and time - was the relationship ever one for the
majority. It is now a relationship, in the Western world at least, for a very small
minority indeed. That minority remains critically important both to our immediate
well-being and to the world’s future, and in my final lecture I shall look ahead to the
implications for the future of war.
While war has become far too expensive financially and emotionally for rich states to
wage with anything approaching the full potentiality (technological and human) their
resources make available, it has also become paradoxically a cheap and deadly
undertaking for poor states, for enemies of the state idea, and for factions in states
falling apart. The rogue ruler, the terrorist and the fundamentalist movement, the
ethnic or religious faction are all enemies as serious as any in an age of junk weapons
as civilisation has ever faced. The threat they offer requires that the responsible
powers committed to the maintenance of peace must be able to deploy forces of the
highest quality - human as well as technological - to any part of the globe at all times.
Membership of such forces require high skills. It also requires a particular ethic: a
readiness by the individual to risk his or her life, not simply for any of the traditional
values by which warriors fought but for the cause of peace itself. The honour of the
honourable warrior has acquired a new meaning. Its fulfilment will make all who
perform it think better of themselves for having been a soldier. Ladies and gentlemen,
we must honour them also. Thank you very much.

6

