REITH LECTURES 1998: War in Our World
John Keegan
Lecture 3: War and the State
TRANSMISSION: 22 April 1998 – BBC Radio 4

‘War made the state and the state makes war’, goes an academic jingle familiar to
most students of political science. The first half of the jingle would not excite
argument among laypeople, who would sensibly say that the origins of the state are
lost in the mists of time. The second half, that by implication the principal function of
the state is to make war, would arouse surprise and probably protest.
In my previous lectures, I surveyed the origins of war and traced how the evolution of
conflict is inextricably linked to the evolution of social groupings and the
development of the nation state. Tonight I shall explore the role of the state in more
detail.
Paradoxically, the state known to modern Western Europeans and North Americans is
a benevolent, not a belligerent institution. It educates, heals and feeds through the
institutions of the school and university system, the health services and social security
provision, and does much else besides. It is a giving, not a taking entity, in marked
contrast to many 19th century states which were known to citizens chiefly for taking
their sons to serve in the army. Today’s nation state is a welfare state and not much
more besides.
If the functions of the state are at all a cause of difference between citizens today, it is
because they disagree over how much the state should give. To give, it must take, of
course, and all taxpayers groan at fiscal deductions from what they earn. The right of
the state to tax is now contested, however, only by a handful of extreme libertarians.
Taxation is accepted by the vast majority as necessary to the collective good. It is only
the question of whether state spending affects for the bad the individual virtues of
independence, self-sufficiency and choice that arouses dispute.
The nannying by the nanny state of the old, sick and very poor carries consent. That
of those suspected of having brought misfortune upon themselves often does not. The
dispute translates sometimes onto the moral plain: should the state usurp the
individual’s right to choose; should the fiscal system not be so arranged that the
citizen is left sufficient financial freedom to decide what school his children attend,
what doctor he consults, what pension he buys?
At either level of debate, however, the issue is about how much the state should or
should not provide. The idea that the state should be provided with services by the
citizen, the even starker idea that it should take without giving at all simply does not
arise. And yet until very recent times, the state gave little more than quite sketchy
services of domestic law and order while at times taking very much indeed.

1

In 1793, the first French Republic instituted decrees which required every citizen to
put himself or herself at the state’s disposition. The decree most strictly enforced that
requiring every young man to serve in the army. Where the French Republic led, other
states followed - with the result that by the 19th century’s end most European states
had taken draconian powers to extract service from their younger male citizens and
were, in consequence, potent war-making agencies and, it might be thought, very little
else besides.
That phase in the history of the state - at least the liberal democratic state - has passed.
Since 1945, there has been a progressive abandonment of the state’s demand for
universal military service - a trend accelerated since the fall of the Berlin Wall in
1989. The United States and Britain were by then already relying on quite small
volunteer forces for their defence, and their example is becoming general.
France has announced that it will abolish conscription within the next decade - an
extraordinary decision for a country which effectively invented the practice and long
insisted that only by doing uniform duty to the republic could its young be taught
civic virtue.
Germany insists that conscription must continue because citizen enlistment guarantees
that its armed forces will remain dutiful to democracy. This judgement superficially is
understandable in terms of Germany’s history. Its generosity in granting the right of
conscientious objection means, nevertheless, that service is in effect voluntary.
Even Russia, which has maintained vast conscript armies for centuries, is now talking
of moving to a voluntary system. All over Europe and the Americas, armies are
withering away. Only in Asia and Africa do large armed forces continue in existence,
often as the instruments of selfishly dictatorial regimes. Wherever electorates rule,
they are withdrawing their consent from the state’s right to make their sons soldiers.
This development offers not only a striking new dimension to the debate over whether
it is the state’s principal role to make war. It also calls into question the logic of the
proposition that the state and the practice of war-making are entangled in an
inextricable and unique relationship.
The modern liberal democratic state exerts powers and accepts responsibilities greater
by far than those given to and laid on its predecessors. If it now subordinates its
military functions to those of providing for the welfare, education, healthcare and
often housing of its citizens, ought we not to re-examine the historical record to
identify whether war-making has always predominated among the state’s activities?
Equally, many of the 150 states that have come into existence since 1945 (when there
were only 50 sovereignties in the world) display a fierce capacity to make war, but
otherwise perform almost none of the duties expected of a state. They deserve, in
short, the description of state only because they are warlike. Since many modern wars
are not conducted by states at all, ought we not to re-examine the idea that it is warmaking that defines the state?
History does provide grounds for disbelieving in the inevitable destiny of states to
fight. The Egyptian river kingdom of the first pharaohs - to take a notable example 2

may have been, probably was, unified by force. Once unified, however, it enjoyed a
period of undisturbed peace for nearly 1500 years, from 3000 to 1700 BC. There were
special geographical reasons for that: it was too isolated to be easily attacked; and,
because of the wealth that the Nile flood brought, had no material reason to attack
others.
It might, nevertheless, have settled for a hand to mouth way of economic life at
subsistence level, as other ecologically favoured societies often did - notably in the
islands of Polynesia. That proved not to be the Egyptians’ choice. Under the rule of
the god kings, they found ways of avoiding the Polynesian pattern of cyclical
expulsion of surplus population by violence, devising means instead to intensify
agricultural yield. Meanwhile, the energy that might have been consumed in domestic
war-making was diverted instead into the creation of great works of monumental art,
rivalling, perhaps exceeding in grandeur all other artistic achievements of
Mediterranean antiquity and still a wonder of the world.
The life of the common Egyptian under Pharaonic rule might not have suited you or
me. Theirs was clearly not a free society, nor one where the individual - however rich
or important - counted for much under the hierarchy of the gods. Pharaonic Egypt
was, nevertheless, that politically scientific contradiction in terms: a true state,
working at the highest level of cultural activity, which found no need to wage war,
and for a period as long as Europe has been Christian. Only when Nubian raiders
started to penetrate the Upper Nile Valley in about 1900 BC did the kingdom begin to
add fortification to its architectural activity. Foreigners who had acquired the new
technology of the war chariot only appeared on the Lower Nile from 1600 BC when
the pharaohs finally had to become war leaders.
So a state without a military culture, without even a standing army is a perfectly
practical polity. Does the contradiction work the other way round: can there be an
army without a state? All too easily if the history of the horse peoples of the Central
Asian Steppe is taken into account.
Until about 4,000 years ago, the horse was chiefly kept for eating. Then, either
through mutation or selective breeding, a variety of horse appeared that was strong
enough to be used to pull a vehicle and, soon after, to be ridden by a man. The
military value of the domesticated horse was quickly grasped. Chariot driving, warrior
aristocracies seized power all over the Middle East, China and Mediterranean Europe
during the second millennium BC and held it until the nearly simultaneous appearance
of iron weapons and ridden cavalry horses toppled their bronze base monopoly of
military force about 1000 BC.
Then other developments - notably those of standing armies in Europe and strategic
fortification in China - beat the horse warriors back onto the steppe where the
domesticated horse probably originated, and there they stayed for over 1000 years.
They made their first reappearance in Western history when Attila’s Huns attacked
the Roman Empire in the 5th century AD and returned in successive waves
throughout the early Middle Ages, but as a nagging threat rather than a destructive
menace.

3

In the 13th century, however, a thitherto unknown horse people - Genghis Khan’s
Mongols - emerged from the great Central Asian sea of grass to fall on settled
civilisation in the greatest campaign of conquest ever known before or since. Within a
single century, Genghis and his descendents had overthrown the power of the Islamic
caliphate and the Chinese throne to control an empire which stretched from the
Pacific to the Black Sea, from Siberia to the Himalayas, from the Persian Gulf to the
Sea of Japan.
Historians of the Mongol conquests make much of the Mongols’ military
sophistication and of their skills in subordinating conquered peoples to their power.
They were indeed adept at perpetuating the administrative systems they found in place
and in enforcing order. To argue hence that the Mongols were a political people and
their empire a state seems to me to defy meaning.
Mongol conquest had a single purpose: to extract by violent extortion the revenue that
would allow them to enjoy, in luxury rather than poverty, their nomadic and warrior
way of life. So determined were they to remain horse warriors that in China large
areas of agricultural land were turned back into pasture for the grazing herds and the
dispossessed peasants massacred. Genghis himself said that the greatest pleasure in
life was to “chase and defeat the enemy, seize his possessions, ride his horse, leave his
married women weeping and use their bodies as a nightshirt”. It is not surprising, in
view of Genghis’ world outlook, that there are no biographies of Mongol scholars,
thinkers, artists or entrepreneurs; or that though they were in their time the most
powerful people in the world, no political, cultural or intellectual achievement can be
associated with their rule whatsoever. Their society found no place for any man who
was not a warrior, and they ended as they began: an army on horseback.
If we can accept that history yields examples both of states without armies and armies
detached from states, we can return with a fresh eye to the proposition that war is
exclusively a state activity and that states are necessarily war-making agencies. The
first part of the proposition can be dismissed with confidence. War is not an
exclusively state activity, was not in the past and is not in the present - as the rise of
non-state warfare in the Balkans, for example, painfully exemplifies.
The second part of the proposition is more contentious. The state must clearly
maintain internal peace as a minimum condition of its acceptability to those who live
under its authority. It must equally secure its borders against external attack for the
same reason. Do these two responsibilities therefore define it as an essentially military
entity? The states that dominate the history books - those of classical Greece, the
Roman Republic and its successors, the Islamic caliphate, the Chinese Empire - were
clearly very military indeed. The Greek city states and the later Roman Republican
Empire accepted war as a condition of survival and waged it very fiercely. Chinese
civilisation deprecated war-making however from early times. One of the best known
of Confucian aphorisms teaches that the rational man achieves his ends without
violence. While the rise of the great monotheistic religions of Christianity and Islam
caused the European and near Eastern peoples that embraced them to agonise over the
morality of killing fellow children of God for centuries.
Islam, a religion much misunderstood in the West, was a conquering creed in origin.
Its holy book forbids, nevertheless, use of violence against those who submit, so that
4

non-believers who yield to Islamic authority must be granted both the freedom to
practice their own religion and protection against their enemies.
Many early Christians interpreted the New Testament as a pacifist text; and, though
the early Christian powers behaved otherwise in practice, the idea that the ten
commandments should regulate relations at least between Christian peoples was
translated into a set of elaborate legal codes. These required the doing of penance for
shedding Christian blood - forty days penance for even wounding a fellow Christian
done by the Norman knights after the victory of Hastings; and the avoidance of warmaking during the Christian year’s penitential seasons: advent and lent.
Islam went further. The prophets’ prohibition of fighting between Muslims was taken
so seriously by the devout that during the civil wars of the early caliphate contestants
recruited armies of infidel slaves to do the fighting on their behalf.
As long as states deferred to superordinate authority, to priests and the religion they
preached, they could avoid confronting the moral dilemma in which their use of
violence involved them. Since worldly power came from God and his priests taught
how it might and might not be used, states (or at least their leaders) did not have to
take a view about whether the use of violence was intrinsic to their status. Religion
and its rules removed the matter, as it were, from their hands, leaving legitimate states
in a morally subordinate position.
All that was changed, at least in Western Europe, by the division of Christianity at the
reformation when religious authority itself became the cause of conflict. The
Protestant states thereafter rejected the right of the universal church to judge their
actions, while the Catholic states took that rejection as grounds to make war against
them in clear conscience. The outcome was The Thirty Years War - the worst thus far
in European history, which may have killed a third of the German speaking peoples
and left Central Europe devastated for much of the 17th century.
These awful results of the collapse of universal and superordinate authority provoked
the search for an alternative legal basis on which relationships between states could be
established. It was found by a new profession of international jurists who proposed
that since states could no longer agree on where higher sovereignty lay, they should
each become sovereign themselves. As sovereignties, they would exist as independent
moral entities - perhaps better, amoral entities - each judging how it should behave
exclusively in terms of its own interests.
From the idea of the amorally sovereign state, anticipated by Machiavelli at the
beginning of the Renaissance, to that of the state as a purposefully and perhaps
primarily war-making machine was but a short step. Europe was set a bad example by
the first French Republic, which claimed justification for its widespread aggression in
its self-assumed duty to bring the rights of liberty and equality to oppress peoples
elsewhere.
The success with which it waged ideological war prompted the Prussian soldier, Carl
von Clausewitz, to promulgate the most pernicious philosophy of war-making yet
conceived: “War”, he said, “is nothing more than the continuation of politics by
means of force” (he may have meant policy - the German word ‘politik’ obscures a
5

point) “and it is to be limited only by the calculation of the political interest in which
it was undertaken in the first place”.
War, in short, is a value free activity outside the moral sphere. But the implication is
that politics is too, since the state’s use of force works in a continuum that begins with
the punishment of its own citizens who defy its interests. Therefore nothing can or
should restrain the state’s right to act violently except the threat of superior violence
in return.
I call Clausewitz pernicious because his political philosophy underlies that of the
totalitarian state. It is significant that his is the only name mentioned in Hitler’s
political testament written just before he killed himself in the Berlin bunker amid the
ruins of the state he had led to destruction in April 1945. By then historical fact had
twice denied the Clausewitzian dictum that war “limits itself rationally, if not morally,
by the automatic operation of calculation of state interest”.
The First World War quite escaped the control of Germany’s rulers in 1918, leaving
them unable to negotiate a way out of national starvation except by complete
capitulation to all the victors’ demands. By 1945, Hitler’s refusal as head of state to
negotiate in the state’s interests in any way led to the extinction of sovereignty itself
while his completely amoral use of state power in the prosecution of the war
condemned his people to pariah status among nations for decades afterwards.
Even while Clausewitz was polluting civilised thoughts about how war could and
should be fought, other and contrary influences were at work. In reaction to the
military excesses of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Empire, the chief
European states attempted after 1815 to create a continental system that would avert
war between its members by subordinating sovereignty to the commonly shared value
of preserving peace. It worked for nearly 50 years. The resurgence of war-making
towards the century’s end was not accepted with complacency. The international
Hague Convention of 1899 had as its object, accepted by the signatories, not only the
limitation of armaments but the creation of a supranational court designed to avert
war by arbitration. There was a second Hague Convention in 1907, while a third was
planned for 1915.
By then the reasonable Hague system had been overwhelmed by the worst European
war since that of The Thirty Years. Its spirit, however, survived. After 1918 jurists
returned to the issue of how relations between states should be regulated. While their
predecessors after 1648 had elevated state sovereignty to a supreme position,
untrammelled sovereignty was now itself identified as the enemy of peace. Even
before the war’s end, President Wilson of the United States had proposed the creation
of a League of Nations, which would exercise a superordinate authority lost at the
reformation. And in 1928 a Franco-American pact, to which many nations subscribed,
renounced the use of war as an instrument of policy.
In 1939, Hitler made a mockery both of the League of Nations and the KelloggBriand Pact. Neither, however, would lie down. In 1945, there was brought into being
an organisation of United Nations, which established by charter and consent both the
subordination of all military sovereignty to its own; and the illegality of war itself,
self-defence excepted, unless sanctioned by its own authority.
6

The world in consequence has now returned to the international system that arose
when states first began to acknowledge the superior authority of monotheistic
religion. States are no longer militarily sovereign any more than those within the
European Union are politically sovereign, even if that union did not (as its most
enthusiastic supporters claim) originate as an anti-war association. States are
subordinate to a power greater than themselves. They cannot make war at wish;
certainly cannot claim state interest or political necessity to make war as they choose.
The ordinary citizen who doubts that it is the state’s chief role to make war on his
behalf has, even if over a very long time span, been proved right after all. How that
legacy has shaped his life as an individual will be the subject of my next lecture.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.

7

