REITH LECTURES 1998: War in Our World
John Keegan
Lecture 2: The Origins of War
TRANSMISSION: 15 April 1998 – BBC Radio 4

War, as I argued in my first lecture, has overtaken disease and famine in the hierarchy
of threats this world offers to human life, liberty and happiness only in very recent
times. We must be realistic: life is itself a dangerous and ultimately fatal condition;
we are all going to die.
No-one in Britain today, however, fears death by starvation, and it is safe to predict
that a relatively small proportion of people in the world will die for lack of food in
what remains of this century. Such assumptions mark a revolutionary shift in
expectations, for even in 18th century France, then the richest country in Europe, rich
and poor alike waited on tenterhooks for the next harvest: the poor because they might
not survive a hunger winter; the rich because the hungry might rise in revolution.
Our assumptions about the menace of disease have altered also. As late as the early
decades of this century, even the very rich were stalked by fear of infections that the
most expensive medicine could not hold at bay; while the passage from life to death
was associated not only with squalor and indignity, but often with uncontrollable
pain.
Such fears have largely left us, but the fear of war will not go away. Indeed because
war has got worse, so has our fear of what it threatens. That fear may for the moment,
to borrow a term from medicine, be ‘in remission’. The end of the Cold War, the
relaxation of nuclear confrontation have taken military crisis from the front page.
Nevertheless, we are nagged by the anxiety that the absence of bad news will not last.
We cannot speak of good news in a decade during which television has brought us the
scenes of massacre in Rwanda and Bosnia.
That is not unreasonable; rational judgement underpins our altered attitudes to
sickness and want. Man has equally rational reasons for mistrusting the power of
reason to control human behaviour. While we recognise that it is irrational to risk
nuclear punishment in a world dominated by nuclear weapons, we equally recognise
that we are a risk-taking species. In a sense, we know ourselves too well to feel
confidence in the hope that man will behave any better in the future than he did in the
past. We suspect that there is something ineradicable in ourselves, or in the way we
organise our lives together - or perhaps in both - that makes general war sometime,
somewhere inevitable.
What can we say about the origins of war? Little that will not cause conflict between
scholars. Students of the origins of war broadly divide into those who look for
evidence of it embedded in human nature, and those who seek it among the external
or contingent influences which act upon human nature. The naturalists, as the first
group is known, divide further and with marked hostility. A minority of them insist
1

that man is naturally violent, as many animal species are. The majority, by contrast,
regard violence as an aberrant, unnatural activity to be found only in flawed
individuals or as a response to particular sorts of provocation or stimulation and,
therefore, avoidable if such triggers can be identified and palliated or eliminated.
The strength of feeling on the subject among the naturalist majority is exemplified by
what has become their loyalty test: the Seville Statement of May 1986, modelled on
UNESCO’s statement on race and now adopted by the American Anthropological
Association as its official position. The statement contains five articles, each prefaced
by the words ‘it is scientifically incorrect’. Thus if one subscribes to the Seville
Statement, it is scientifically incorrect to believe that we have inherited a tendency to
make war from our animal ancestors, or to believe that war or any other violent
behaviour is genetically programmed into human nature. It also asserts that it is
scientifically incorrect to believe that in the course of human evolution, there has been
a selection for aggressive behaviour more than for other kinds of behaviour; that
humans have a violent brain or, finally, to believe that war is caused by instinct or any
other single motivation.
There is much to be admired about the Seville Statement since it seeks to liberate the
human race from the deadening conviction that war is its natural lot. Unfortunately,
there is little that is scientific about it. Science has thus far quite failed to substantiate
any of its five articles, some of which are not scientific propositions at all. Animals do
not make war; they kill to eat, even if occasionally in a wasteful feeding frenzy.
War is too complex an activity for step by step genetic mutation to programme
organisms for it, and geneticists lack the evidence to strike a balance between
selection for this behaviour or that within the vast human behavioural range. The
Seville Statement, in short, is one of hope, not objective truth. Objectively, all that
science has been able to establish about human nature and war is the whereabouts in
the human brain of what scientists call “the seat of aggression” and how it may be
stimulated or physically altered to produce aggressive behaviour.
The seat of aggression, known as the limbic system, is located low in the central brain
and contains three groups of cells: the hypothalamus, the septum and the amygdala.
Each group alters behaviour when it is damaged or electrically stimulated, but not in a
uniform way. If, for example, part of the hypothalamus of a male rat is damaged, the
rat becomes less aggressive. Electrical stimulation of it, on the other hand, makes the
rat more aggressive, though only towards less dominant rats. This pattern is
discernible in other species and suggests that the direction of aggression is controlled
by a higher part of the brain, the frontal lobes, where incoming sensations are
processed.
Fear may be products of such processing, but so also is prudence, and each is
communicated from the frontal lobes to the limbic system by hormonal or neural
transmitters. When the appropriate hormones or stimulants are applied to the limbic
system, they produce more aggressive behaviour. However, no experiment has yet
followed the processing of incoming sensations in all its complexity through to the
final transmitting outcome. We simply do not know, therefore, how the limbic system
responds to the frontal lobes and so cannot say whether, by analogy from animals,

2

man is more rational than instinctive or the other way about. The neural origins of
aggression have not been clarified.
Genetics is more revealing: more rather than less aggressive individuals are
identifiable in many species and breeding for aggression can transmit that
characteristic. Fighting bulls, for example, are bred by selection.
We also know that certain chromosome patterns in humans are associated with
aggressive behaviour, and that the group of one in a thousand males that inherits two
rather than one Y chromosome yields a slightly higher and disproportionate number
of violent criminals.
In the study of collective human behaviour, however, neither laboratory experiments
with the limbic system, nor controlled genetic selection, are significant. The human
race is not a laboratory species; nor do its members obey genetically selective rules in
yielding to sexual attraction. It is, thank goodness, still love that makes the world go
round.
If hard science will not show us the origins of war, we must look elsewhere - to the
softer world of social science and, particularly, to anthropology and psychology. One
of the earliest general explanations of group aggression was proposed in 1913 by
Sigmund Freud who considered the patriarchal family was the most significant unit of
society. He suggested that sons resented their father’s sexual monopoly over the
family’s women, and that this led to conflict and, eventually, to the father’s murder.
The sons’ consequent guilt created revulsion against incest and drove men first to take
sexual partners only from beyond the family group and then to a primitive warfare of
wife stealing.
Now it is certainly true that wife stealing was a common cause of fighting among
primitive peoples, particularly those who practiced female infanticide as a means of
limiting population increase. What is certainly also true, however, is that some such
peoples - historically the Eskimo, for example - were notable for not waging war in
any form we would recognise. Freud’s theory, though attractive to those who shared
his belief that our sexual natures dominate our behaviour, must be recognised as no
better than guesswork.
Ethologists, who seek to establish how human beings develop and perpetuate
behaviour patterns, work by guesswork also - though at least from the basis of
observed animal behaviour. In 1966, the most famous ethologist of aggression,
Konrad Lorenz, a Nobel Prize winner, published his theory of territoriality. Predatory
animals, he argued, have hunting territories which they defend, but also submissive
reflexes that deter them from attacking interlopers stronger than themselves.
However, when man the hunter invented weapons, he learnt to kill at a distance,
beyond the range at which submissive reflexes work. When territory was hunted out,
he then began to fight other men over territorial rights.
The idea of territoriality was refined by Robert Ardrey, who added the observation
that “hunting but also fighting yields larger kills to individuals who cooperate in
groups”. His explanation of the origins of the hunting band was enlarged by the
improbably named Robin Fox and Lionel Tiger. They argued that the presence of
females in such bands distracted from their main purpose, so that they became all
3

male. The most effective, and by implication most aggressive hunter, emerged as a
leader; and since he effectively ensured the livelihood of the band and all its
dependents - male and female - aggressive male leadership thereafter determined the
ethos of every human society.
Society in short, like it or not, is red in tooth and claw. Many students of society,
particularly in the world of anthropology, did not like the idea at all. Long before the
ethologists entered the field, others had attempted to translate Darwin’s theory of
natural selection from the animal to the human kingdom. The opponents of social
Darwinism, as it came to be known, protested that man’s capacity to choose liberated
him from the necessity to dominate or defer, kill or be killed.
Perhaps the most celebrated of anti-Darwinians is the American, Margaret Mead. As a
young anthropologist in the 1920s, she returned from the South Seas with the news
that she had discovered in Samoa an ideal society: a society in which patriarchal
authority was dissolved within the affections of the extended family. Free love had
abolished sexual jealousy; children did not compete; and violence was almost
unknown. Samoans lived as they did, she said, because they chose to do so; and she
argued that what they chose, others could.

Much attacked by moralists in her time, and now criticised by fellow anthropologists
for defective methodology, she never faltered in her permissive beliefs. She remained
a dedicated anti-militarist, and in 1940 restated her faith in human free will in a now
famous article: ‘War Is Only An Invention, Not a Biological Necessity’.
The proposition that war may indeed be only an invention has driven a new
generation of anthropologists to examine as many primordial societies as still remain,
particularly those in the South American Rainforest and Highland New Guinea for
evidence of how they make war or why they do not.
The range of behaviour discovered is very wide: from the very violent indeed, as
among the Yanamamo of Brazil, to the almost wholly pacific as among the Semai of
Malaysia.
The military practices of these peoples is of the highest intrinsic interest, particularly
the practice of ritual or symbolic combat, by which conflict is resolved with little
killing; sometimes without bloodletting at all. Such restraint, where found, lends
support to the view that our ancestors were not as violent as we, that war is not in our
genes; and that we may indeed, by choice, revert to wiser ways.
Unfortunately, there is no certainty at all that the surviving primitives are primordial,
or that their ways of war represent those of our ancestors of the mainstream. The
prevailing anthropological consensus is that the peoples of distant forests and
mountains are simply the losers in a long, drawn-out process of adaptation. They have
been, in the language of anthropology, marginalised in the competition to inhabit land
of first choice; and we must, therefore, regard the quaint military habits of those who
avoid bloody battle as a reflection of their failure as warriors, not as evidence of our
lost social wisdom.
4

I have to say I myself accept the implications of the theory of marginalisation with
reluctance. War may have got worse with the passage of time, but the ethic of
restraint has rarely been wholly absent from its practice. We know of course of
episodes in which the victors killed without mercy. We know equally that even in the
age of total warfare, there remain taboos enshrined in law and thankfully widely
observed against killing the defenceless: women, children, the old, the sick and
wounded, and those who care for them. I cannot believe that these inhibitions do not
have very deep roots in human nature, and I am convinced that the symbolic and ritual
military customs of the surviving primitives are significant to our understanding of
war.
Nevertheless, we must recognise that at some moment combat became nakedly
purposeful. When was that? Not long ago in the very long timescale of human
existence. If we date the present phase of our life on earth from the latest retreat of the
glaciers, we divide the subsequent 12,000 years into a short period when man could
still subsist as a hunter and the later, longer period when he had to find some other
means of livelihood.
It is an illusion to believe that pesticides and herbicides have been the principal
destroyers of wildlife. It was hunting that killed off the great herds and large-bodied
animals in the temperate regions, and with such efficiency that man was driven first to
protecting the survivors in domesticated flocks and then to cultivating the vegetable
life on which they subsisted for his own consumption. Yet pastoralism and agriculture
are not, as we congratulate ourselves, self-evident advances for human beings. Their
development marks both a desperate necessity and a regression. The life of a nomad
was probably healthier, by far, than that of a farmer. Happier too and, as long as
wildlife remained plentiful, more prosperous also. Perhaps more pacific as well.
Hunting bans may have been driven to fight each other over territory as herds
dwindled, but since many major species - the horse in North America, for example was wiped out long before the available territory was fully populated, it seems more
probable that the hunters would have migrated to find fresh prey rather than stay to
squabble over the depleted hunting grounds. Certainly the evidence for the practice of
warfare among late Stone Age hunters is even more sparse than their numbers were
and too ambiguous to be argued convincingly either way.

The appearance in the temperate world 10,000 years ago of agricultural communities
in the river valleys and near other water sources must, however, have confronted the
hunting societies with a novel and tempting opportunity. Hunters, used to a diet of
flesh, may not have been attracted initially by the farmers’ stored grain crops, but
their sheep and cattle must have looked easy meat.
We may infer that from the very early appearance of fixed defences at the first
agricultural sites. At Jericho in modern Israel, for example, archaeology has revealed
that the communities settled around the perpetual spring in the desert had built a
circular wall, dug a moat, and erected a tower to protect their little city as early as

5

8000 BC. Only the threat of violence by raiders from the arid zone beyond can have
prompted them to undertake such an expensive and time-consuming labour.
Other communities, in Egypt and Mesopotamia, enjoyed an easier start in agriculture.
The Egyptians of the Nile Valley, surrounded by deep desert on either side and
protected by the Delta to the north and Cataracts to the south, appear not to have faced
a military challenge until about 2000 BC. As a result, their civilisation was dominated
at the outset not by warriors, but by priests whose authority derived from their power
(as it was believed) to intervene with the gods who regulated the annual flood.
Civilisation in Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers in
modern Iraq, was originally also theocratic; the function of its priest kings being that
of organising the distribution of the annual flood water into irrigation channels.
Mesopotamia’s natural defences, however, are weaker than Egypt’s and more easily
penetrated by raiders from the desert and the nearby mountains; while the distribution
of the yearly snowmelt - more lethargic by far than the Nile’s overflowing - in itself
entailed dispute and the regulation of conflict.
It is understandable, therefore, that while the archaeology of Egypt tells us of a
kingdom long peaceful, that of Mesopotamia exhibits the development of a military
system as early as 3000 BC in writing, in fortification, and also in the appearance of
metallic armour and weapons. The small cities of the flood plain were then evidently
fighting among themselves. How regularly, we do not know. It is apparent, however,
that conflict was leading to consolidation; that centres of power were amalgamating;
that weapon systems, particularly the horse-drawn chariot, were under development;
and that the military culture of the Mesopotamians was beginning to embrace the idea
of offensive warfare.
The saga of Gilgamesh, ruler of the city of Uruk, tells in one of the earliest documents
of history - written about 2700 BC - the story of what is unmistakably an offensive
military campaign. Only a thousand years later, about 1300 BC, a successor kingdom
of Uruk - that of Assur or Assyria - had become a true military empire. The Assyrians
had now passed beyond the stage of beating back the savage raiders of the deserts and
mountains from their borders; were carrying the attack to their enemies and had
created the first recognisable army in history, made up of specialists of several sorts:
engineers and logistic troops as well as charioteers and infantrymen.
The origins of war had been surpassed. War was now a fact of life and a chief
function of another new fact of life: the state. What is the relationship between war
and the state? Must states make war? It is that question my next lecture addresses.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.

6

