REITH LECTURES 1998: War in Our World
John Keegan
Lecture 1: War in Our World
TRANSMISSION: 8 April 1998 – BBC Radio 4

War has been the scourge of this century. The ride of the other three horsemen of the
apocalypse, and particularly famine and pestilence, has been halted and even turned
back during the last 90 years. Nowhere in the world today is starvation unavoidable,
while the diseases that killed our forebears in millions - plague, cholera and typhus
foremost amongst them - are almost forgotten afflictions. It is war that has replaced
them as an enemy of human life, well-being, happiness and optimism.
The effect of war on the lives of human individuals and the communities in which
they live is the theme of these lectures.
Much of what I have to say dwells on war’s scourge-like nature, and on the way in
which from small beginnings war came in our own century to threaten the survival of
civilisation itself. I hope to lead my audience to conclude, as I do, that the worst of
war is now behind us and that mankind, with vigilance and resolution, will henceforth
be able to conduct the affairs of the world in a way that allows war a diminishing part.
The First World War killed at least 10 million people in battle, most of them young or
very young men, and millions more died from war-related causes. The Second World
War killed 50 million, of whom less than half were servicemen in uniform.
Yugoslavia, for example, lost 10% of its population, of which but a fraction belonged
to the Royal Yugoslav Army. The rest died as a result of deprivation, reprisal or
internecine massacre.
The toll of war persisted beyond the great peace of 1945. Civil wars and wars of
national liberation in China, Vietnam, Algeria, the Middle East, Angola and
Mozambique and the inter-ethnic wars that have followed the dissolution of empires
are often calculated to have killed another 50 million. How conscious we all are of the
killings that have affronted civilised sentiment in this decade: the killings in Rwanda
and Bosnia that have added another million victims to the century’s casualty list.
Demographers explain that human fertility soon replaces the war dead. No war
anywhere, except the Paraguayan War of 1864 to 70, has ever equalled or even
approached the lethality of the Black Death which killed one European in four in the
14th century. Birth rates rapidly recover - as they did even in Paraguay, which lost
nine tenths of its males - and populations continue to increase.
If the costs of war were measured solely in statistics, they could indeed be shrugged
off. The costs, however, are not measured only on graphs. The unquantifiable cost is
in emotional suffering by which the pain of one death is often multiplied many times
through the network of family relationships and in long-term, indeed lifelong
deprivation.
1

Even demographers admit that war losses cause a generational imbalance between the
sexes. In Germany, in 1945, the imbalance between males and females of
marriageable age stood at 100 to 180, which left hundreds of thousands of German
women without hope of marriage or remarriage. The imbalance in the Soviet Union,
which had lost 10 rather than 4 million soldiers, was higher still.
The emotional cost of war has moreover been heightened in this century in a
peculiarly excruciating way. The wounds of war are always self-inflicted - unlike
those caused by disease against which mankind struggled in vain for millennia.
Traditionally imprecise and long delayed, news of the death in war of someone dear
was accompanied by the eternal and consequent why, asked by those who heard of it,
to which have been added in our time the long drawn out apprehensions of will it be
us; and, if so, when?
Ours has been, we constantly congratulate ourselves, the news century. The news
gatherer has become a modern celebrity, and the means by which he or she transmits
what he or she learns - the telegraph, radio, television and now fax and email - are
among our chief modern marvels.
What the permeation of our consciousness by constant reportage has led us to forget is
that for several long periods during the lifetime of people still alive, news is what they
did not want to hear. The telegraph boy on his bicycle, peddling the suburban street,
symbol to the Victorians of a new and benevolent technological advance became for
parents and wives during both world wars literally an omen of terror - for it was by
telegram that the awful flimsy form beginning ‘we regret to inform you that …’ was
brought to front doors; a trigger for the articulation of the constant unspoken prayer:
let him pass by, let him stop at another house, let it not be us.
In Britain during the First World War, that prayer was not answered several million
times. On 700,000 occasions, the telegraph boy brought the ultimate bad news of the
death of a son, husband or brother. ‘We are dreading the telegram that so many have
received lately’, wrote Robert Saunders a fortnight after the opening of the Battle of
the Somme in which his son was serving and already 20,000 young British soldiers
had been killed.
The ‘terror by day’ - as the wartime telegram has been called - could inflict direct,
immediate and inextinguishable pain simply by what it told. Patrick Dalzel-Job, a
Second World War naval officer, describes how as a young and only child, he heard
the news of his father’s death in the First World War. He was playing with a
mechanical toy in the space between the bed and the wall in a rented seaside room,
which his mother had taken while his father was away at the Front. She was brushing
her hair, silhouetted against the window. While she brushed it, she told him that
daddy would not be coming back from the war. She continued to brush her hair. After
an interval, he resumed play with his mechanical toy. His mother, who was still young
during the Second World War, did not remarry.
Sometimes a telegram tortured because the news it brought was imprecise. “Down on
your knees, Julia, and thank god you haven’t a son”, said Rudyard Kipling to a friend
while he waited to hear news of his only son, John, reported missing after the Battle
2

of Loos in September 1915. For months he and Carrie, his wife, kept up hope that
John might be a prisoner. Carrie hoped longer than Rudyard. Eventually he wrote a
short poem of acceptance that John was dead. ‘My son was killed while laughing at
some jest. I would I knew what it was and it might serve me in a time when jests are
few’.
Kipling deluded himself, or perhaps was deluded by one of the many Irish guardsmen
from whom he sought word of his son’s fate. His friend, Rider Haggard, who had met
the last of John’s comrades to see him alive, knew that he was then crying in pain
from a wound in the mouth. Where and when John later died no-one can tell. He was
one of the 500,000 British soldiers of the Great War whose bodies were lost in the
wasteland of shattered trenches and crater fields which battle left behind. Ironically,
as we now know, his remains were eventually discovered and re-interred under a
headstone bearing the words Rudyard Kipling had himself composed to
commemorate the missing: ‘known unto God’.
Sometimes, finally, the telegram tortured - with fatal effect - even if it did not come at
all. Let me give an example. It is one of the tragedies of the 20th century that most
mature adults have a war story: good sometimes; bad more often. Here is a bad one of
my own. I did not know my paternal grandmother who died many years before I was
born in the winter of 1917. At the time my father was an 18 year old gunner, serving
in a battery near Arras on the Western Front. On hearing that his mother was gravely
ill, he was sent home on compassionate leave but arrived too late. A neighbour met
him as he walked from the station to the family house and unwittingly commiserated
with him on his bereavement. He told me the story among his carefully censored war
memories. But later, when he was himself near death, he revealed a little more. That
summer, as his mother had taken him to the station to see him off to France in his new
khaki, she had broken down. “I shall never see you again”, she said.
I wondered, continue to wonder, at the depth of anguish that could have torn such
words from a loving parent at such a moment. My father’s sister, one of the army of
spinsters left by the Great War, added some explanation towards the end of her own
life. She had seen her three brothers go to the war: Richard in 1915, Edward in 1916.
When Frank went in 1917, she said “The worry began to consume my mother. She
wasn’t really very ill that winter; she just gave up the ghost”. So a mother had
frightened herself to death as if to fulfil the awful prophecy dragged out of her on the
railway platform from which she had sent her youngest off to the carnage. Ironically
again, all three brothers came safely back - physically almost untouched from their
years in the trenches.
I offer this small family reminiscence not for its personal but for its universal
significance. That is a theme taken up by George MacDonald Fraser in his wonderful
memoir of service in the Border Regiment in Burma in 1944-5. Throughout, he was
acutely conscious of the risks he ran. Two of his nine immediate comrades were
indeed killed in what he calls “the lottery of active service”. In reflection, however, it
is with those in England that he most strongly identifies. ‘Whatever anxieties a soldier
may experience in the field’, he writes, ‘can be nothing to the torment of those at
home. Those months must have been the longest of my parents’ lives.’

3

The point he is seeking to make, I think, is that soldiers know when and why they
have reason to be in fear, which typically is not very often. War service has been
called ‘long periods of boredom punctuated by moments of acute terror’. Yet those
who worry for them do so every waking hour. In this century, moreover, endemic
anxiety has been an emotion of majorities throughout Europe, North America, much
of Asia and Australia, and parts of Africa for very long periods. Why was that?
George MacDonald Fraser again illuminates. On hearing news of the outbreak of the
Second World War, his grandmother remarked: “Well the men will be going away
again.” Her matter-of-fact acceptance of a reality she correctly anticipated reminds us
that advanced states achieved in her lifetime what none had previously succeeded in
doing: making every man a soldier.
Traditionally armies were hard to assemble. Soldiers might be hired, but at such cost
that price kept mercenary armies small. They could be employed on long-term
contract as regulars, but the expense of regular armies kept them small also by means
still difficult to dissect. During the 19th century nation states managed to persuade
their populations that all fit males should undergo military training in early manhood.
Conscript service produced large, relatively cheap peacetime armies, while the reserve
obligation promised to produce very large wartime ones. The institution of the census
supplied the names and addresses of those of military age. The introduction of
compulsory education disciplined the potential recruits and fitted them for training.
Meanwhile, the rise of factory work, itself a disciplinary influence, yielded both the
goods necessary to arm and equip the conscript millions and the wealth that could be
taxed to pay for them.
Yet what these developments do not explain is why populations, separate from states,
consented to raise the enormous armies that twice in this century worldwide and
regionally more often than that have inflicted such an emotional burden on those who
assented to - or at least acquiesced in - their creation. All we can say is that they did.
Historians recognise that there was a militarization of Europe in the last century - one
effect of which was to represent military service as an honourable duty all ought to
undertake, and the maintenance of big armies and navies as a good thing.
The military mood persisted into the first half of this century and that mood combined
with very large numbers of fighting men to generate battles on a scale and of a
duration never known before. We now call them Battles of Attrition. Passchendaele
and Verdun are examples from the First World War; Stalingrad and Normandy from
the Second. Attrition is the process in which the infliction of casualties on constantly
replaced numbers is protracted until the resolution of one side or the other breaks. Yet
the paradox was that generals and states had argued for large armies because numbers
were supposed to bring quick and cheap victories. When eventually they produced
any long casualty lists, that outcome was rationalised as a necessary means to victory.
When populations began to question whether victory was worth the price, as the
French and British did after 1918, we can begin to identify a reversal of the military
mood that captured Europe in the 19th century.
Moods, however, are difficult to change and they alter erratically over time and from
place to place. Only after 1945 did the Germans and Japanese decide that the quest for
4

victory had cost an unbearable price. American military triumphalism was thrown into
reverse only by the crisis of the Vietnam War, and not until this decade did a new
generation of North Vietnamese begin to question whether a conflict that killed
200,000 of their young men each year between 1966 and 1972 was really worth
fighting.
I’ve spoken so far only of the human cost of war and largely of the emotional effect of
that cost on our world. I am prepared to justify that bias for material damage is more
easily and quickly made good than emotional loss, which never can be. Nevertheless,
we must remember that the material damage caused by the Second World War, in
particular, was as unparalleled in scale as the loss of life in both world wars, and that
the effort to repair it distorted normal economic activity for decades.
A striking example of how great was the material loss caused by the Second World
War is presented by the case of the United States. In 1939 the American economy was
the largest in the world, as it had been since the late 19th century. By 1945, the
American national product was equal in value to that of the rest of the world put
together. Spared the effects of strategic bombing, blockade and fighting over its
territory between 1941 and 1945, the United States had been able to raise both
domestic consumption and industrial output, to maximise agricultural yields, to
modernise its infrastructure, to increase exploitation of its readily available natural
resources without exhausting them, and still by the war’s end to have accumulated a
fiscal surplus which alone offered hope of providing the investment necessary to
repair the catastrophic damage inflicted by war on other economies - those of friend
and foe alike - exposed to every one of the calamities it had avoided.
The calamities suffered by the defeated were calamities indeed. The centre of all
Germany’s largest cities had been bombed flat or burnt out, and as many as a million
German civilians - the majority women and children - had been killed under air
attack. To return for a moment to the emotional dimension of the war, many of the 4
million German soldiers killed in battle must have fought their last actions afflicted by
the worry of whether their loved ones lived or not. This is not to solicit special
sympathy for the nation that had initiated the war. It is merely to recognise that
Germany was the most heavily bombed country among the combatants.
Materially the Japanese suffered even worse. During 1945, 60% of the ground area of
Japan’s sixty largest cities was burnt out in an air campaign that killed more civilians
than the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August. During 1945,
normal economic life in Germany and Japan was brought to a halt and their
populations were fed in defeat by the charity of their enemies. In the Soviet Union, a
victor nation, economic activity had declined by two-thirds, while in Britain victory
brought even slimmer rations than had passed the U-boat blockade.
In every major combatant country except the United States, years of unproductive
military expenditure and of underinvestment in the civilian economy - often no
investment at all - condemned the people who welcomed the peace to a new round of
economic self-denial in the cause of repairing the war’s self-inflicted wounds.
Some wounds could not be repaired. The cultural damage caused by the war included
the destruction of much of the built heritage of England, Germany and Austria, often
5

in reprisal bombing raids, and the deliberate devastation of such sites as the Russian
and German imperial palaces, the old city of Warsaw and the Abbey of Montecassino,
mother house of European monasticism. There was as well much collateral damage to
the architectural heritage of Italy, France and the Low Countries. Among the art
treasures destroyed - or lost for years without trace as a result of private or official
looting - were the contents of the Great Berlin Museum stored in the city’s flak
towers. A fire in the Friedrichshain flak tower on May 6th 1945 destroyed 434 old
master paintings, including works by Botticelli, Caravaggio, Titian, Veronese and
Rubens, and such German masters as Cranach and Menzel.
War has always been destructive of treasure. War has also always been destructive of
life. The point towards which I have been striving, however, and on which I want to
conclude is this. War, until very recent times, was not among life’s great enemies.
Famine, yes. Fear of famine was among the causes of the French Revolution. Disease
too. Plague, cholera and typhus regularly killed millions more than wars ever did until
those of the French Revolution and perhaps afterwards. War had previously had
occasional epidemic effects as during The Thirty Years’ War of the 17th century. Yet
a visitation from that particular apocalyptic horseman always stood lower in man’s
fears than those of the arbitrary and impersonal arrival of successful germs or of the
failure of crops.
The fear of war as a widespread killer first began to afflict families only in the 19th
century - first of all, I think, in the United States during the Civil War as lines from
Walt Whitman’s poem ‘Come Up From The Fields Father’ so piercingly convey:
‘See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better. Alas, poor boy, he will
never be better’.
Only in the 20th century did the fear of war finally overtake in force the primordial
anxieties associated with deprivation and sickness. Ironically, or paradoxically, the
appalling cost of warfare achieved in the 20th century is the outcome of an exactly
contrary aspiration. Automatic weapon fire, massed artillery bombardment, aerial
bombing, unpiloted missiles and ultimately nuclear and thermonuclear weapons almost every single one of the century’s so-called advances in military technology or
practice was conceived and developed as a means of sparing loss of life at least to
one’s own side. That they too often resulted not in quick and cheap victory, but in
bloody attrition, cannot deny that incontestable fact.
How did it come about that a manmade affliction, war, has only quite recently
succeeded in replacing the calamities of the natural world as our chief life threatening
phenomenon? How indeed did war begin in the first place? Those questions will be
the subject of my next two lectures. Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.

6

