REITH LECTURES 1999: Runaway World
Anthony Giddens
Lecture 1: Globalisation
TRANSMISSION: 7 April 1999
Recorded at The Royal Institution of Great Britain, London, for BBC Radio 4

A friend of mine studies village life in central Africa. A few years ago, she paid her
first visit to a remote area where she was to carry out her fieldwork. The evening she
got there, she was invited to a local home for an evening's entertainment. She
expected to find out about the traditional pastimes of this isolated community. Instead,
the evening turned out to be a viewing of Basic Instinct on video. The film at that
point hadn't even reached the cinemas in London. Such vignettes reveal something
about our world. And what they reveal isn't trivial. It isn't just a matter of people
adding modern paraphernalia - videos, TVs, personal computers and so forth - to their
traditional ways of life. We live in a world of transformations, affecting almost every
aspect of what we do. For better or worse, we are being propelled into a global order
that no one fully understands, but which is making its effects felt upon all of us.
Globalisation is the main theme of my lecture tonight, and of the lectures as a whole.
The term may not be - it isn't - a particularly attractive or elegant one. But absolutely
no-one who wants to understand our prospects and possibilities at century's end can
ignore it. I travel a lot to speak abroad. I haven't been to a single country recently
where globalisation isn't being intensively discussed. In France, the word is
mondialisation. In Spain and Latin America, it is globalization. The Germans say
globalisierung.
The global spread of the term is evidence of the very developments to which it refers.
Every business guru talks about it. No political speech is complete without reference
to it. Yet as little as 10 years ago the term was hardly used, either in the academic
literature or in everyday language. It has come from nowhere to be almost
everywhere. Given its sudden popularity, we shouldn't be surprised that the meaning
of the notion isn't always clear, or that an intellectual reaction has set in against it.
Globalisation has something to do with the thesis that we now all live in one world but in what ways exactly, and is the idea really valid?
Different thinkers have taken almost completely opposite views about globalisation in
debates that have sprung up over the past few years. Some dispute the whole thing. I'll
call them the sceptics. According to the sceptics, all the talk about globalisation is
only that - just talk. Whatever its benefits, its trials and tribulations, the global
economy isn't especially different from that which existed at previous periods. The
world carries on much the same as it has done for many years.
Most countries, the sceptics argue, only gain a small amount of their income from
external trade. Moreover, a good deal of economic exchange is between regions,
rather than being truly world-wide. The countries of the European Union, for

1

example, mostly trade among themselves. The same is true of the other main trading
blocs, such as those of the Asia Pacific or North America.
Others, however, take a very different position. I'll label them the radicals. The
radicals argue that not only is globalisation very real, but that its consequences can be
felt everywhere. The global marketplace, they say, is much more developed than even
two or three decades ago, and is indifferent to national borders. Nations have lost
most of the sovereignty they once had, and politicians have lost most of their
capability to influence events. It isn't surprising that no one respects political leaders
any more, or has much interest in what they have to say. The era of the nation state is
over. Nations, as the Japanese business writer Keniche Ohmae puts it, have become
mere 'fictions'. Authors like Ohmae see the economic difficulties of last year and this
as demonstrating the reality of globalisation, albeit seen from its disruptive side.
The sceptics tend to be on the political left, especially the old left. For if all of this is
essentially a myth, governments can still intervene in economic life and the welfare
state remain intact. The notion of globalisation, according to the sceptics, is an
ideology put about by free-marketeers who wish to dismantle welfare systems and cut
back on state expenditures. What has happened is at most a reversion to how the
world was a century ago. In the late 19th Century there was already an open global
economy, with a great deal of trade, including trade in currencies.
Well, who is right in this debate? I think it is the radicals. The level of world trade
today is much higher than it ever was before, and involves a much wider range of
goods and services. But the biggest difference is in the level of finance and capital
flows. Geared as it is to electronic money - money that exists only as digits in
computers - the current world economy has no parallels in earlier times. In the new
global electronic economy, fund managers, banks, corporations, as well as millions of
individual investors, can transfer vast amounts of capital from one side of the world to
another at the click of a mouse. As they do so, they can destabilise what might have
seemed rock-solid economies - as happened in East Asia.
The volume of world financial transactions is usually measured in US dollars. A
million dollars is a lot of money for most people. Measured as a stack of thousand
dollar notes, it would be eight inches high. A billion dollars - in other words, a million
million - would be over 120 miles high, 20 times higher than Mount Everest.
Yet far more than a trillion dollars is now turned over each day on global currency
markets, a massive increase from only 10 years ago, let alone the more distant past.
The value of whatever money we may have in our pockets, or our bank accounts,
shifts from moment to moment according to fluctuations in such markets. I would
have no hesitation, therefore, in saying that globalisation, as we are experiencing it, is
in many respects not only new, but revolutionary.
However, I don't believe either the sceptics or the radicals have properly understood
either what it is or its implications for us. Both groups see the phenomenon almost
solely in economic terms. This is a mistake. Globalisation is political, technological
and cultural, as well as economic. It has been influenced above all by developments in
systems of communication, dating back only to the late 1960's.
In the mid-19th Century, a Massachusetts portrait painter, Samuel Morse, transmitted
the first message, "What hath god wrought?", by electric telegraph. In so doing, he

2

initiated a new phase in world history. Never before could a message be sent without
someone going somewhere to carry it. Yet the advent of satellite communications
marks every bit as dramatic a break with the past. The first communications satellite
was launched only just over 30 years ago. Now there are more than 200 such satellites
above the earth, each carrying a vast range of information. For the first time ever,
instantaneous communication is possible from one side of the world to the other.
Other types of electronic communication, more and more integrated with satellite
transmission, have also accelerated over the past few years. No dedicated transatlantic
or transpacific cables existed at all until the late 1950's. The first held less than 100
voice paths. Those of today carry more than a million.
On the first of February 1999, about 150 years after Morse invented his system of dots
and dashes, Morse code finally disappeared from the world stage, discontinued as a
means of communication for the sea. In its place has come a system using satellite
technology, whereby any ship in distress can be pinpointed immediately. Most
countries prepared for the transition some while before. The French, for example,
stopped using Morse as a distress code in their local waters two years ago, signing off
with a Gallic flourish: 'Calling all. This is our last cry before our eternal silence'.
Instantaneous electronic communication isn't just a way in which news or information
is conveyed more quickly. Its existence alters the very texture of our lives, rich and
poor alike. When the image of Nelson Mandela maybe is more familiar to us than the
face of our next door neighbour, something has changed in the nature of our everyday
experience.
Nelson Mandela is a global celebrity, and celebrity itself is largely a product of new
communications technology. The reach of media technologies is growing with each
wave of innovation. It took 40 years for radio in the United States to gain an audience
of 50 million. The same number were using personal computers only 15 years after
the PC was introduced. It needed a mere four years, after it was made available for 50
million Americans to be regularly using the Internet.
It is wrong to think of globalisation as just concerning the big systems, like the world
financial order. Globalisation isn't only about what is 'out there', remote and far away
from the individual. It is an 'in here' phenomenon too, influencing intimate and
personal aspects of our lives. The debate about family values, for example, that is
going on in many countries, might seem far removed from globalising influences. It
isn't. Traditional family systems are becoming transformed, or are under strain, in
many parts of the world, particularly as women stake claim to greater equality. There
has never before been a society, so far as we know from the historical record, in
which women have been even approximately equal to men. This is a truly global
revolution in everyday life, whose consequences are being felt around the world in
spheres from work to politics.
Globalisation thus is a complex set of processes, not a single one. And these operate
in a contradictory or oppositional fashion. Most people think of it as simply 'pulling
away' power or influence from local communities and nations into the global arena.
And indeed this is one of its consequences. Nations do lose some of the economic
power they once had. However, it also has an opposite effect. Globalisation not only
pulls upwards, it pushes downwards, creating new pressures for local autonomy. The
American sociologist Daniel Bell expresses this very well when he says that the

3

nation becomes too small to solve the big problems, but also too large to solve the
small ones.
Globalisation is the reason for the revival of local cultural identities in different parts
of the world. If one asks, for example, why the Scots want more independence in the
UK, or why there is a strong separatist movement in Quebec, the answer is not to be
found only in their cultural history. Local nationalisms spring up as a response to
globalising tendencies, as the hold of older nation-states weakens.
Globalisation also squeezes sideways. It creates new economic and cultural zones
within and across nations. Examples are the Hong Kong region, northern Italy, or
Silicon Valley in California. The area around Barcelona in northern Spain extends
over into France. Catalonia, where Barcelona is located, is closely integrated into the
European Union. It is part of Spain, yet also looks outwards.
The changes are being propelled by a range of factors, some structural, others more
specific and historical. Economic influences are certainly among the driving forces,
especially the global financial system. Yet they aren't like forces of nature. They have
been shaped by technology, and cultural diffusion, as well as by the decisions of
governments to liberalise and deregulate their national economies.
The collapse of Soviet communism has added further weight to such developments,
since no significant group of countries any longer stands outside. That collapse wasn't
just something that happened to occur. Globalisation explains both why and how
Soviet communism met its end. The Soviet Union and the East European countries
were comparable to the West in terms of growth rates until somewhere around the
early 1970s. After that point, they fell rapidly behind. Soviet communism, with its
emphasis upon state-run enterprise and heavy industry, could not compete in the
global electronic economy. The ideological and cultural control upon which
communist political authority was based similarly could not survive in an era of
global media.
The Soviet and the East European regimes were unable to prevent the reception of
western radio and TV broadcasts. Television played a direct role in the 1989
revolutions, which have rightly been called the first "television revolutions". Street
protests taking place in one country were watched by the audiences in others, large
numbers of whom then took to the streets themselves.
Globalisation, of course, isn't developing in an even-handed way, and is by no means
wholly benign in its consequences. To many living outside Europe and North
America, it looks uncomfortably like Westernisation - or, perhaps, Americanisation,
since the US is now the sole superpower, with a dominant economic, cultural and
military position in the global order. Many of the most visible cultural expressions of
globalisation are American - Coca-Cola, McDonald's.
Most of giant multinational companies are based in the US too. Those that aren't all
come from the rich countries, not the poorer areas of the world. A pessimistic view of
globalisation would consider it largely an affair of the industrial North, in which the
developing societies of the South play little or no active part. It would see it as
destroying local cultures, widening world inequalities and worsening the lot of the

4

impoverished. Globalisation, some argue, creates a world of winners and losers, a few
on the fast track to prosperity, the majority condemned to a life of misery and despair.
And indeed the statistics are daunting. The share of the poorest fifth of the world's
population in global income has dropped from 2.3% to 1.4% over the past 10 years.
The proportion taken by the richest fifth, on the other hand, has risen from 70% to
85%. In Sub-Saharan Africa, 20 countries have lower incomes per head in real terms
than they did two decades ago. In many less developed countries, safety and
environmental regulations are low or virtually non-existent. Some trans-national
companies sell goods there that are controlled or banned in the industrial countries poor quality medical drugs, destructive pesticides or high tar and nicotine content
cigarettes. As one writer put it recently, rather than a global village, this is more like
global pillage.
Along with ecological risk, to which it is related, expanding inequality is the most
serious problem facing world society. It will not do, however, merely to blame it on
the wealthy. It is fundamental to my argument that globalisation today is only partly
Westernisation. Of course the western nations, and more generally the industrial
countries, still have far more influence over world affairs than do the poorer states.
But globalisation is becoming increasingly de-centred - not under the control of any
group of nations, and still less of the large corporations. Its effects are felt just as
much in the western countries as elsewhere.
This is true of the global financial system, communications and media, and of changes
affecting the nature of government itself. Examples of 'reverse colonisation' are
becoming more and more common. Reverse colonisation means that non-western
countries influence developments in the west. Examples abound - such as the
Latinising of Los Angeles, the emergence of a globally-oriented high-tech sector in
India, or the selling of Brazilian TV programmes to Portugal.
Is globalisation a force promoting the general good? The question can't be answered
in simple way, given the complexity of the phenomenon. People who ask it, and who
blame globalisation for deepening world inequalities, usually have in mind economic
globalisation, and within that, free trade. Now it is surely obvious that free trade is not
an unalloyed benefit. This is especially so as concerns the less developed countries.
Opening up a country, or regions within it, to free trade can undermine a local
subsistence economy. An area that becomes dependent upon a few products sold on
world markets is very vulnerable to shifts in prices as well as to technological change.
Trade always needs a framework of institutions, as do other forms of economic
development. Markets cannot be created by purely economic means, and how far a
given economy should be exposed to the world marketplace must depend upon a
range of criteria. Yet to oppose economic globalisation, and to opt for economic
protectionism, would be a misplaced tactic for rich and poor nations alike.
Protectionism may be a necessary strategy at some times and in some countries. In my
view, for example, Malaysia was correct to introduce controls in 1998, to stem the
flood of capital from the country. But more permanent forms of protectionism will not
help the development of the poor countries, and among the rich would lead to warring
trade blocs.
The debates about globalisation I mentioned at the beginning have concentrated
mainly upon its implications for the nation-state. Are nation-states, and hence national

5

political leaders, still powerful, or are they becoming largely irrelevant to the forces
shaping the world? Nation-states are indeed still powerful and political leaders have a
large role to play in the world. Yet at the same time the nation-state is being reshaped
before our eyes. National economic policy can't be as effective as it once was. More
importantly, nations have to rethink their identities now the older forms of geopolitics
are becoming obsolete. Although this is a contentious point, I would say that,
following the dissolving of the cold war, nations no longer have enemies. Who are the
enemies of Britain, or France, or Japan? Nations today face risks and dangers rather
than enemies, a massive shift in their very nature.
It isn't only of the nation that such comments could be made. Everywhere we look, we
see institutions that appear the same as they used to be from the outside, and carry the
same names, but inside have become quite different. We continue to talk of the
nation, the family, work, tradition, nature, as if they were all the same as in the past.
They are not. The outer shell remains, but inside all is different - and this is happening
not only in the US, Britain, or France, but almost everywhere. They are what I call
shell institutions, and I shall talk about them quite a bit in the lectures to come. They
are institutions that have become inadequate to the tasks they are called upon to
perform.
As the changes I have described in this lecture gather weight, they are creating
something that has never existed before, a global cosmopolitan society. We are the
first generation to live in this society, whose contours we can as yet only dimly see. It
is shaking up our existing ways of life, no matter where we happen to be. This is not at least at the moment - a global order driven by collective human will. Instead, it is
emerging in an anarchic, haphazard, fashion, carried along by a mixture of economic,
technological and cultural imperatives.
It is not settled or secure, but fraught with anxieties, as well as scarred by deep
divisions. Many of us feel in the grip of forces over which we have no control. Can
we re-impose our will upon them? I believe we can. The powerlessness we experience
is not a sign of personal failings, but reflects the incapacities of our institutions. We
need to reconstruct those we have, or create new ones, in ways appropriate to the
global age.
We should and we can look to achieve greater control over our runaway world. We
shan't be able to do so if we shirk the challenges, or pretend that all can go on as
before. For globalisation is not incidental to our lives today. It is a shift in our very
life circumstances. It is the way we now live.

6

