REITH LECTURES 1999: Runaway World
Anthony Giddens
Lecture 5: Democracy
TRANSMISSION: 5 May 1999
Recorded at The Royal Institution of Great Britain, London for BBC Radio 4

On November 9th, 1989, I was in Berlin - in what was then West Germany. At the
meeting I had come to take part in, some of those present were from East Berlin. One
such person, who was away that afternoon, later came back in a state of some
excitement. He had been in the East, and was told that the Berlin Wall was on the
point of being opened.
A small group of us got down there very quickly. Ladders were being put against it
and we started to climb up. But we were pushed back by television crews who had
just arrived on the scene. They had to go up first, they said, so that they could film us
scaling the ladders and arriving at the top. They even persuaded some people to go
back down and climb up twice, to make sure they had good TV footage.
Thus is history made in the closing years of the 20th Century. Television not only gets
there first, it stages the spectacle. In a way, as I shall go on to argue, the TV crews had
the right to push themselves to the front. For television had an important role in
making the opening of the wall happen, as it did more generally in the transformations
of 1989 in Eastern Europe. The driving force of the 1989 revolutions was democracy
or self-rule. And the spread of democracy in the recent period has been strongly
influenced by the advance of global communications.
Democracy is perhaps the most powerful energising idea of the 20th Century. There
are few states in the world today that don't call themselves democratic. The Soviet
Union and its East European dependencies called themselves 'people's democracies',
as communist China continues to do. Virtually the only countries that are explicitly
non-democratic are the last remaining semi-feudal states like Saudi Arabia - and even
these are hardly untouched by democratic currents.
What is democracy? The issue is a contentious one, and many different interpretations
have been offered. I shall mean by it the following. Democracy is a system involving
effective competition between political parties for positions of power. In a democracy,
there are regular and fair elections, in which all members of the population may take
part. These rights of democratic participation go along with civil liberties - freedom of
expression and discussion, together with the freedom to form and join political groups
or associations.
Democracy isn't an all or nothing thing. There can be different forms, as well as
different levels, of democratisation. Democracy in Britain and the United States, for
instance, isn't all of a piece. A British traveller in the US once enquired of an
American companion: 'how can you bear to be governed by people you wouldn't

1

dream of inviting to dinner?' to which the American replied, 'how can you bear to be
governed by people who wouldn't dream of inviting you to dinner? More or less
everyone is a democrat now, but it certainly wasn't always so. Democratic ideas were
fiercely resisted by established elites and ruling groups in the 19th Century, and often
treated with derision. Democracy was the inspiring ideal of the American and French
revolutions, but for a long while its hold was limited. Only a minority of the
population had the vote. Even some of the most fervent advocates of democratic
government, such as the philosopher John Stuart Mill, argued that limitations should
be imposed on it. Mill recommended that some of the electorate should have more
votes than others, so that in his words, the 'wiser and talented' have more influence
than the 'ignorant and less able'.
Democracy in the West only became fully developed in the current century. Before
the First World War, women had the right to vote in only four countries - Finland,
Norway, Australia and New Zealand. They didn't get the vote in Switzerland until as
late as 1974. Moreover, some countries that became fully democratic later
experienced relapses. Germany, Italy, Austria, Spain and Portugal all had periods of
authoritarian rule or military dictatorship during the period from the 1930's to the
1970's. Outside Europe, North America and Australasia, there have only been a small
number of long-standing democracies, such as Costa Rica in Latin America.
Over the past few decades, however, much of this has changed, and in a remarkable
way. Since the mid-1970s, the number of democratic governments in the world has
more than doubled. Democracy has spread to over thirty more countries, while all the
existing democratic states have kept democratic institutions in place. These changes
began in Mediterranean Europe, with the overthrow of the military regimes in Greece,
Spain and Portugal. The second group of countries where democracy spread - this
time mainly in the early 1980s, was in South and Central America. Some twelve
countries established or re-established democratic government, including Brazil, Peru
and Argentina.
The story continues across all continents. The transition to democracy post 1989 in
Eastern Europe, and parts of the ex Soviet Union, was followed in a number of
countries in Africa. In Asia, with some problems and reversals, democratisation has
been going on over the whole period since the early 1970s - in South Korea, Taiwan,
the Philippines, Bangladesh, Thailand and Mongolia. India has remained a democratic
state since its independence in 1947.
Of course, some states making the transition to democracy fall short of full
democratisation, or appear to have stalled along the way. Russia is only one of many
examples. Others are simply putting back what existed before. Argentina, and some
other Latin American countries, have had democratic government previously, as have
the Czech Republic, or Poland in Easter Europe. Since democratic governments have
in Eastern Europe often been overthrown, we can't be sure how permanent any of
these democratic transitions will be. Yet democracy has made nearly as much advance
during the past thirty years as it did over more than a whole century before that. Why?
One possible answer is offered by those who take a triumphalist view of the Western
combination of democracy and free markets. This is that other systems have been
tried and have failed. Democracy has come out top because it is best. It simply took
most countries outside the Western ambit some while to recognise this.

2

I wouldn't dispute part of the argument. Democracy is best. But as an account of the
recent waves of democratisation, it is hardly adequate. It doesn't explain why such
changes should happen at this juncture in history.
To get a better explanation, we need to resolve what I shall call the paradox of
democracy. The paradox of democracy is this. On the one hand, democracy is
spreading over the world, as I have just described. Yet in the mature democracies,
which the rest of the world is supposed to be copying, there is widespread
disillusionment with democratic processes. In most Western countries, levels of trust
in politicians have dropped over past years. Fewer people turn out to vote than used
to, particularly in the US. More and more people say that they are uninterested in
parliamentary politics, especially among the younger generation. Why are citizens in
democratic countries apparently becoming disillusioned with democratic government,
at the same time as it is spreading around the rest of the world?
The changes I have been analysing throughout these lectures explain why. For
increasing numbers across the world, life is no longer lived as fate - as relatively fixed
and determined - authoritarian government becomes out of line with other life
experiences, including the flexibility and dynamism necessary to compete in the
global electronic economy. Political power based upon authoritarian command can no
longer draw upon reserves of traditional deference, or respect.
In a world based upon active communication, hard power - power that comes only
from the top down - loses its edge. The economic conditions that the Soviet Union
couldn't handle - the need for decentralisation and flexibility - were mirrored in
politics. Information monopoly, upon which the political system was based, has no
future in an intrinsically open framework of global communications.
In the East European events of 1989, large numbers of people took to the streets. But unlike almost any other revolution in history - there was remarkably little violence.
What seemed a system of implacable power - Communist totalitarianism - faded away
as though it had hardly existed. Few thought apartheid in South Africa could
disappear without being forcibly overthrown. But it did. The only episodes of
violence that occurred in 1989 were involved in the seizure of television stations.
Those who invaded them got their priorities right. The communications revolution has
produced more active, reflexive citizenries than existed before. It is these very
developments that are at the same time producing disaffection in the long-established
democracies. In a detraditionalising world, politicians can't rely upon the old forms of
pomp and circumstance to justify what they do. Orthodox parliamentary politics
becomes remote from the flood of change sweeping through people's lives.
Where does this leave democracy itself? Should we accept that democratic institutions
are becoming marginal just at the point where democracy seems on a roll?
Some very interesting findings are revealed in the opinion polls carried out in
different Western countries about trust in government. People have indeed lost a good
deal of the trust they used to have in politicians and orthodox democratic procedures.
They haven't lost their faith, however, in democratic processes. In a recent survey in
the US and the major West European countries, well over 90% of the population said
they approved of democratic government. Moreover, contrary to what many assume,
most people aren't becoming uninterested in politics as such. The findings actually

3

show the reverse. People are more interested in politics than they used to be. This
includes the younger generation. Younger people are not, as has so often been said a
generation X, disaffected and alienated.
What they are, or many of them are, is more cynical about the claims politicians make
and concerned about questions that they feel politicians have little to say about. Many
regard politics as a corrupt business, in which political leaders are self-interested,
rather than having the good of their citizens at heart. Younger people see issues such
as ecological questions, human rights, family policy and sexual freedom as most
important. On an economic level, they don't believe that politicians are able to deal
with the forces moving the world. As everyone understands, many of these go beyond
the level of the nation state. It isn't surprising that activists should choose to put their
energies into special interest groups, since these promise what orthodox politics seems
unable to deliver.
How can democracy and active government be sustained when they seem to have lost
their purchase on events? I think there are answers. What is needed in the democratic
countries is a deepening of democracy itself. I shall call this democratising
democracy. But democracy today must also become transnational. We need to
democratise above the level of the nation. A globalising era demands global
responses, and this applies to politics just as much as any other area.
A deepening of democracy is required, because the old mechanisms of government
don't work in a society where citizens live in the same information environment as
those in power over them. Western democratic governments, of course, have never
been as secretive as communist states or other types of authoritarian government. Yet
secretive in some contexts they certainly have been. Think, for example, of how much
was concealed by the US and British governments in the cold war period about
nuclear testing and weapons development. Western democratic systems have also
involved old-boy networks, political patronage and back stage deals. They frequently
make use of traditional symbolism, and traditional forms of power, that are less than
wholly democratic. The House of Lords in the UK is only one of the most obvious of
such examples. As traditions lose their grip, what once seemed venerable, and worthy
of respect, almost overnight can come to appear quaint, or even ridiculous.
It was not by accident there have been so many corruption scandals in politics around
the world in the past few years. From Japan to Germany, France and the US to the
UK, corruption cases have made the news. I doubt that corruption is more common in
democratic countries than it used to be. Rather, in an open information society it is
more visible, and the boundaries of what counts as corruption have shifted. In Britain,
for example, the old boy network in the past was simply the way in which things were
done, even when left of centre parties were in power. Such networks have hardly
disappeared, but much of what used to happen through them, and be widely accepted,
is now defined as illegitimate.
The democratising of democracy will take different forms in different countries,
depending on their background. But there isn't any country so advanced that it is
exempt. Democratising democracy means having an effective devolution of power,
where - as in Britain - power is still strongly concentrated at the national level. It
means having effective anti-corruption measures at all levels.

4

It often implies constitutional reform, and the promotion of greater transparency in
political affairs. We should also be prepared to experiment with alternative
democratic procedures, especially when these might help bring political decisionmaking close to the everyday concerns of citizens. Peoples' juries, for example, or
electronic referenda, won't replace representative democracy, but they can be a useful
complement to it.
Political parties will have to get more used to collaborating with single issue groups,
such as ecological pressure groups, than they have in the past. Some people see
contemporary societies as fragmented and disorganised, but in fact the opposite is
true. People are getting more involved in groups and associations than they used to. In
Britain, 20 times more people belong to voluntary or self-help groups than are
members of political parties, and much the same is true of other countries.
Single issue groups are often at the forefront in raising problems and questions that
may go ignored in orthodox political circles until too late. Thus well before the BSE
crisis in the UK groups and movements had been warning about the dangers of
contamination in the food chain.
The democratising of democracy also depends upon the fostering of a strong civic
culture. This is absolutely central. Markets cannot produce such a culture. Nor can a
pluralism of special interest groups. We shouldn't think of there being only two
sectors of society, the state and the marketplace - or the public and the private. In
between is the area of civil society, including the family and other non-economic
institutions. Building a democracy of the emotions, of which I spoke last time, is one
part of a progressive civic culture. Civil society is the arena in which democratic
attitudes, including tolerance, have to be developed. The civic sphere can be fostered
by government, but is in its turn its cultural basis.
The democratising of democracy isn't relevant only to the mature democracies. It can
help build democratic institutions where they are weak and undernourished. In Russia,
for instance, where gangster capitalism is rife, and strong authoritarian overtones
persist from the past, a more open and democratic society can't be built in only a top
down manner. It has to be constructed bottom up, through a revival of civic culture.
Replacing state control with markets, even if they were more stable than they are,
wouldn't achieve this end. A well-functioning democracy has been aptly compared to
a three-legged stool. Government, the economy and civil society need to be in
balance. If one dominates over the others, unfortunate consequences follow. In the
former Soviet Union, the state dominated most areas of life. Hence, there wasn't an
energetic economy and civil society was all but killed off.
We can't leave the media out of this equation. The media, particularly television, have
a double relation to democracy. On the one hand, as I have stressed, the emergence of
a global information society, is a powerful democratising force. Yet television, and
the other media, tend to destroy the very public space of dialogue they open up,
through a relentless trivialising, and personalising, of political issues. Moreover, the
growth of giant multinational media corporations means that unelected business
tycoons can hold enormous power.
Countering such power can't be a matter of national policy alone. Crucially, the
democratising of democracy can't stop at the level of the nation state. As practised up

5

to now, democratic politics has presumed a national community that is self-governing
and able to shape most of the policies that concern it. It has presumed the sovereign
nation. But under the impact of globalisation, sovereignty has become fuzzy. Nations
and nation-states remain powerful, but there are large democratic deficits opening up as the political scientist, David Held points out - between them and the global forces
that affect the lives of their citizens. Environmental risks, fluctuations in the global
economy, or global technological change, do not respect the borders of nations. They
escape democratic process - one of the main reasons, as I said earlier, for the
declining appeal of democracy where it is best established.
Talk of democracy above the level of the nation might seem quite unrealistic. Such
ideas, after all, were widely spoken of a hundred years ago. Instead of an era of global
harmony, there arrived two world wars, more than a hundred million people have
been killed in warfare during this century.
Are circumstances different now? Obviously no one can say for sure, but I believe
they are. I have given the reasons why in earlier lectures. The world is much more
interdependent than it was a century ago, and the nature of world society has changed.
As a reverse side of the coin, the shared problems we face today - such as global
ecological risks - are also much greater.
How might democracy be fostered above the level of the nation-state? I would look to
the transnational organisations as much as to the international ones. The United
Nations, as its very name indicates, is an association of nation states. For the moment
at least, it rarely challenges the sovereignty of nations, and indeed its charter asserts
that it should not do so. The European Union is different. I would see it as forging a
way that could, and very likely will, be followed in other regions too. What is
important about the EU isn't that it is located in Europe, but that is pioneering a form
of transnational governance. Contrary to what some of its supporters, and its critics
say, it is not a federal state or a super nation-state. But nor is it merely an association
of nations. The countries that have entered the EU have voluntarily given up some of
their sovereignty in order to do so.
Now the European Union isn't itself particularly democratic. It has famously been said
of the EU that if it applied to join itself, it wouldn't get in. The EU doesn't meet the
democratic criteria it demands of its members. Yet there is nothing in principle that
prevents its further democratisation and we should press hard for such change.
The existence of the EU drives home a cardinal principle of democracy, when seen
against the background of the global order. This is that the transnational system can
actively contribute democracy within states, as well as between them. The European
courts, for example, have made a range of decisions, including measures protecting
individual rights that hold within the member countries. As we look round the globe,
at the end of the 20th Century, we can see cause for optimism and pessimism in about
equal measure. The expansion of democracy is a case in point.
On the face of it, democracy seems a fragile flower. In spite of its spread, oppressive
regimes abound, while human rights are routinely flouted in states around the world.
In Kosovo, that unfolding tragedy, hundreds of thousands have been forced from their
homes, and all pretence of the rule of law abandoned. I would like to quote some
words here, from a reporter on the spot: 'nearly half a million refugees' he says, are in

6

Macedonia now. How they are to be fed, nobody knows ... Come over into Macedonia
and help us!' This was published in the Toronto Daily Star. The reporter was Ernest
Hemingway, the date - October 20, 1922. One might be forgiven for thinking that
some problems are simply intractable, without hope of resolution. Democracy might
appear to flourish only in especially fertile soil, which has been cultivated in the long
term. In societies, or regions, that have little history of democratic government,
democracy seems to have shallow roots and is easily swept away.
Yet perhaps all this is changing. Rather than thinking of democracy as a fragile
flower, easily trampled underfoot, perhaps we should see it more as a sturdy plant,
able to grow even on quite barren ground. If my argument is correct, the expansion of
democracy is bound up with structural changes in world society. Nothing comes
without struggle. But the furthering of democracy at all levels is worth fighting for
and it can be achieved. Our runaway world doesn't need less, but more government and this, only democratic institutions can provide.

7

