REITH LECTURES 1999: Runaway World
Anthony Giddens
Lecture 3: Tradition
TRANSMISSION: 21 April 1999
Recorded in Delhi for BBC Radio 4

When Scots get together to celebrate their national identity, they do so in ways
steeped in tradition. Men wear the kilt, with each clan having its own tartan - and their
ceremonials are accompanied by the wail of the bagpipes. By means of these symbols,
they show their loyalty to ancient rituals - rituals whose origins go far back into
antiquity.
Except for the fact that they don't. Along with most other symbols of Scottishness, all
these are quite recent creations. The short kilt seems to have been invented by an
English industrialist from Lancashire, Thomas Rawlinson, in the early 18th Century.
He set out to alter the existing dress of highlanders to make it convenient for
workmen.
Kilts were a product of the industrial revolution. The aim was not to preserve timehonoured customs, but the opposite - to bring the highlanders out of the heather and
into the factory. The kilt didn't start life as the national dress of Scotland. The
lowlanders, who made up the large majority of Scots, saw highland dress as a barbaric
form of clothing, which most looked on with some contempt. Similarly, many of the
clan tartans worn now were devised during the Victorian period, by enterprising
tailors who correctly saw a market in them.
Much of what we think of as traditional, and steeped in the mists of time, is actually a
product at most of the last couple of centuries, and is often much more recent than
that. The case of the Scottish kilt comes from a celebrated volume by the historians
Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, called The Invention of Tradition. They give
examples of invented traditions from a variety of different countries, including
colonial India.
The British set up an archaeological survey in the 1860s to identify the great
monuments of India and to preserve Indian 'heritage'. Believing local arts and crafts to
be in decline, they collected together artefacts to put in museums. Before 1860, for
example, Indian soldiers and the British both wore Western-style uniforms. But in the
eyes of the British, Indians had to look like Indians. The dress uniforms were
modified to include turbans, sashes and tunics regarded as 'authentic'. Some of the
traditions they invented, or half invented, continue on in the country today, although
of course others were later rejected.
Tradition and custom - these have been the stuff of most people's lives for most of
human history. Yet it is remarkable how little interest scholars and thinkers tend to
show in them. There are endless discussions of modernisation and what it means to be

1

modern, but few indeed about tradition. When I was researching for this lecture, I
came across dozens of academic books in English with 'modernity' in the title. Indeed,
I have written a few myself - but I could only discover a couple of books specifically
about tradition.
It was the 18th Century Enlightenment in Europe that gave tradition a bad name. One
of its major figures, the Baron D'Holbach, put things this way. I quote: 'Instructors
have long enough fixed men's eyes upon heaven, let them now turn them upon earth.
Fatigued with an inconceivable theology, ridiculous fables, impenetrable mysteries,
puerile ceremonies, let the human mind apply itself to the study of nature, to
intelligible objects, sensible truths, and useful knowledge. Let the vain chimeras of
men be removed, and reasonable opinions will soon come of themselves, into those
heads which were thought to be forever destined to error'.
It is clear that D'Holbach never intended a serious engagement with tradition and its
role in society. Tradition here is merely the shadow side of modernity, an implausible
construct that can be easily brushed aside. If we are really to get to grips with
tradition, we can't treat it merely as folly. The linguistic roots of the word tradition are
old. The English word has its origins in the Latin term tradere, which meant to
transmit, or give something to another for safekeeping. Tradere was originally used in
the context of Roman Law, where it referred to the laws of inheritance. Property that
passed from one generation to another was supposed to be given in trust - the inheritor
had obligations to protect and nurture it.
It might seem that the notion of tradition, unlike kilts and bagpipes, has been around
for many centuries. Once more, appearances are deceptive. The term 'tradition' as it is
used it today is actually a product of the last 200 years in Europe. Just like the concept
of risk, which I talked about in my last lecture, in mediaeval times there was no
generic notion of tradition. There was no call for such a word, precisely because
tradition and custom were everywhere.
The idea of tradition, then, is itself a creation of modernity. That doesn't mean that
one shouldn't use it in relation to pre-modern or non-Western societies, but it does
imply that we should approach the discussion of tradition with some care. By
identifying tradition with dogma and ignorance, the Enlightenment thinkers sought to
justify their absorption with the new.
Disentangling ourselves from the prejudices of the Enlightenment, how should we
understand 'tradition'? We can make a good start by going back to invented traditions.
Invented traditions and customs, Hobsbawm and Ranger suggest, aren't genuine ones.
They are contrived, rather than growing up spontaneously; they are used as a means
of power; and they haven't existed since time immemorial. Whatever continuity they
imply with the long-term past is largely false.
I would turn their argument on its head. All traditions, I would say, are invented
traditions. No traditional societies were wholly traditional, and traditions and customs
have been invented for a diversity of reasons. We shouldn't suppose that the conscious
construction of tradition is found only in the modern period. Moreover, tradition
always incorporates power, whether they are constructed in a deliberate way or not.

2

Kings, emperors, priests and others have long invented traditions to suit themselves
and to legitimate their rule.
It is a myth to think of traditions as impervious to change. Traditions evolve over
time, but also can be quite suddenly altered or transformed. If I can put it this way,
they are invented and reinvented.
Some traditions, of course, such as those associated with the great religions, have
lasted for hundreds of years. There are core prescriptions of Islam, for instance, that
nearly all Muslim believers would hold to, and which have remained recognisably the
same over a very long period. Yet whatever continuity there is in such doctrines goes
along with many changes, even revolutionary changes, in how they are interpreted
and acted upon. There is no such thing as a completely pure tradition. Like all the
other world religions, Islam drew upon a dazzling variety of cultural resources - that
is, other traditions. The same was true of the Ottoman empire more generally, which
incorporated Arab, Persian, Greek, Roman, Berber, Turkish and Indian influences,
among others, across the years.
But it is simply wrong to suppose that for a given set of symbols or practices to be
traditional, they must have existed for centuries. The Christmas address by the Queen,
which is broadcast every year in Britain, has become a tradition. Yet it only started in
1932. Endurance over time is not the key defining feature of tradition, or of its more
diffuse cousin, custom. The distinguishing characteristics of tradition are ritual and
repetition. Traditions are always properties of groups, communities or collectivities.
Individuals may follow traditions and customs, but traditions are not a quality of
individual behaviour in the way habits are.
What is distinctive about tradition is that it defines a kind of truth. For someone
following a traditional practice, questions don't have to be asked about alternatives.
However much it may change, tradition provides a framework for action that can go
largely unquestioned. Traditions usually have guardians - wise men, priests, sages.
Guardians are not the same as experts. They get their position and power from the fact
that only they are capable of interpreting tradition's ritual truth. Only they can
decipher the real meanings of the sacred texts or the other symbols involved in the
communal rituals.
The Enlightenment set out to destroy the authority of tradition. It only partially
succeeded. Traditions remained strong for a long while in most of modern Europe and
even more firmly entrenched across most of the rest of the world. Many traditions
were reinvented and others were newly instituted. There was a concerted attempt from
some sectors of society to protect or adapt the old traditions. After all, this is basically
what conservative philosophies have been, and are, all about. Tradition is perhaps the
most basic concept of conservatism, since conservatives believe that it contains stored
up wisdom.
A further reason for the persistence of tradition in the industrial countries was that the
institutional changes signalled by modernity were largely confined to public
institutions - especially government and the economy. Traditional ways of doing
things tended to persist, or be re-established, in many other areas of life, including
everyday life. Once could even say there was a sort of symbiosis between modernity

3

and tradition. In most countries, for example, the family, sexuality, and the divisions
between the sexes remained heavily saturated with tradition and custom.
Two basic changes are happening today under the impact of globalisation. In the
Western countries, not just public institutions but everyday life is becoming opened
up from the hold of tradition. And other societies across the world that remained more
traditional are becoming detraditionalised. I take it this is at the core of the emerging
global cosmopolitan society I have spoken of in previous lectures.
This is a society, I argued last week, living after the end of nature. Few aspects of the
physical world, in other words, are any longer just natural - unaffected by human
intervention. It is also a society living after the end of tradition. The end of tradition
doesn't mean that tradition disappears, as the Enlightenment thinkers wanted. On the
contrary, in different versions, it continues to flourish everywhere. But less and less if I can put it this fashion - is it tradition lived in the traditional way. The traditional
way means defending traditional activities through their own ritual and symbolism defending tradition through its internal claims to truth.
A world where modernisation is not confined to one geographical area, but makes
itself felt globally, has a number of consequences for tradition. Tradition and science
sometimes mingle in odd and interesting ways. Consider, for instance, the muchdiscussed episode that happened in India in 1995, when the deities in some Hindu
shrines appeared to drink milk. On the same day, several million people, not only in
India but throughout the world, tried to offer milk to a divine image. Denis Vidal, an
anthropologist who has written about this phenomenon, remarks that I quote again:
'by manifesting themselves simultaneously in every country of the world inhabited by
Indians, the Hindu deities may have succeeded in performing the first ever miracle in
tune with an era haunted by the slogan of globalisation'. Just as interestingly, it was
widely felt - by believers as well as non-believers - that scientific experiments were
needed to authenticate the miracle. Science was enlisted in the service of faith.
Tradition in such an example isn't only still alive, it is resurgent. Yet traditions also
often succumb to modernity, and are doing so in some situations all over the world.
Tradition that is drained of its content, and commercialised, becomes either heritage
or kitsch - the trinkets bought in the airport store. As developed by the heritage
industry, heritage is tradition repackaged as spectacle. The refurbished buildings at
tourist sites may look splendid, and the refurbishment may even be authentic down to
the last detail. But the heritage that is thereby protected is severed from the lifeblood
of tradition, which is its connection with the experience of everyday life.
In my view, it is entirely rational to recognise that traditions are needed in society. We
shouldn't accept the Enlightenment idea that the world should rid itself of tradition
altogether. Traditions are needed, and will always persist, because they give
continuity and form to life. Take academic life, as an example. Everyone in the
academic world works within traditions. Even academic disciplines as a whole, like
economics, sociology or philosophy, have traditions. The reason is that no one could
work in a wholly eclectic fashion. Without intellectual traditions, ideas would have no
focus or direction.
However, it is part of academic life continually to explore the limits of such traditions,
and foster active interchange between them. Tradition can perfectly well be defended
in a non-traditional way - and that should be its future. Ritual, ceremonial and

4

repetition have an important social role, something understood and acted upon by
most organisations, including governments. Traditions will continue to be sustained
insofar as they can effectively be justified - not in terms of their own internal rituals,
but as compared to other traditions or ways of doing things.
This is true even of religious traditions. Religion is normally associated with the idea
of faith, a sort of emotional leap into belief. Yet in a cosmopolitan world, more people
than ever before are regularly in contact with others who think differently from them.
They are required to justify their beliefs, in an implicit way at least, both to
themselves and others. There cannot but be a large dollop of rationality in the
persistence of religious rituals and observances in a detraditionalising society. And
this is exactly as it should be.
As tradition changes its role, however, new dynamics are introduced into our lives.
These can be summarised as a push and pull between autonomy of action and
compulsiveness on the one hand, and between cosmopolitanism and fundamentalism
on the other. Where tradition has retreated, we are forced to live in a more open and
reflective way. Autonomy and freedom can replace the hidden power of tradition with
more open discussion and dialogue. But these freedoms bring other problems in their
wake. A society living on the other side of nature and tradition - as nearly all Western
countries now do - is one that calls for decision-making, in everyday life as elsewhere.
The dark side of decision-making is the rise of addictions and compulsions.
Something really intriguing, but also disturbing, is going on here. It is mostly
confined to the developed countries, but is becoming seen among more middle class
groups elsewhere too. What I am speaking about is the spread of the idea and the
reality of addiction. The notion of addiction was originally applied exclusively to
alcoholism and drug-taking. But now any area of activity can become invaded by it.
One can be addicted to work, exercise, food, sex - or even love. The reason is that
these activities, and other parts of life too, are much less structured by tradition and
custom than once they were.
Like tradition, addiction is about the influence of the past upon the present; and as in
the case of tradition, repetition has a key role. The past in question is individual rather
than collective, and the repetition is driven by anxiety. I would see addiction as frozen
autonomy. Every context of detraditionalisation offers the possibility of greater
freedom of action than existed before. We are talking here about human emancipation
from the constraints of the past. Addiction comes into play when choice, which
should be driven by autonomy, is subverted by anxiety. In tradition, the past structures
the present through shared collective beliefs and sentiments. The addict is also in
thrall to the past - but because he or she cannot break away from what were originally
freely chosen lifestyle habits.
As the influence of tradition and custom shrink on a world-wide level, the very basis
of our self-identity - our sense of self - changes. In more traditional situations, a sense
of self is sustained largely through the stability of the social positions of individuals in
the community. Where tradition lapses, and life-style choice prevails, the self isn't
exempt. Self-identity has to be created and recreated on a more active basis than
before. This explains why therapy and counselling of all kinds have become so
popular in Western countries. When he initiated modern psychotherapy, Freud

5

thought he was establishing a scientific treatment for neurosis. What he was in effect
doing was constructing a method for the renewal of self-identity, in the early stages of
a detraditionalising culture.
After all, what happens in psychotherapy is that the individual revisits his or her past
in order to create more autonomy for the future. Much the same is true in the self-help
groups that have become so common in Western societies. At alcoholics anonymous
meetings, for instance, individuals recount their life histories, and receive support
from others present in stating their desire to change. They recover from their addiction
essentially through rewriting the story-line of their lives.
The struggle between addiction and autonomy is at one pole of globalisation. At the
other is the clash between a cosmopolitan outlook and fundamentalism. One might
think that fundamentalism has always existed. This is not so - it has arisen in response
to the globalising influences we see all round us. The term itself dates from the turn of
the century, when it was used to refer to the beliefs of some Protestant sects in
America, particularly those who rejected Darwin. Yet even in the late 1950's there
was no entry for the word 'fundamentalism' in the large Oxford English dictionary. It
has come into common coinage only over the past two or three decades.
Fundamentalism is not the same as either fanaticism or authoritarianism.
Fundamentalists call for a return to basic scriptures or texts, supposed to be read in a
literal manner, and they propose that the doctrines derived from such a reading be
applied to social, economic or political life. Fundamentalism gives new vitality and
importance to the guardians of tradition. Only they have access to the 'exact meaning'
of the texts. The clergy or other privileged interpreters gain secular as well as
religious power. They may look to take over the reins of government directly - as
happened in Iran - or work in conjunction with political parties.
Fundamentalism is a controversial word, because many of those called
fundamentalists by others wouldn't accept the term as applying to themselves. So can
an objective meaning be given to it? I think it can, and I would define it in the
following fashion. Fundamentalism is beleaguered tradition. It is tradition defended in
the traditional way - by reference to ritual truth - in a globalising world that asks for
reasons. Fundamentalism, therefore, has nothing to do with the context of beliefs,
religious or otherwise. What matters is how the truth of beliefs is defended or
asserted.
Fundamentalism isn't about what people believe but, like tradition more generally,
about why they believe it and how they justify it. It isn't confined to religion. The
Chinese red guards, with their devotion to Mao's little red book, were surely
fundamentalists. Nor is fundamentalism primarily about the resistance of more
traditional cultures to Westernisation - a rejection of Western decadence.
Fundamentalism can develop on the soil of traditions of all sorts. It has no time for
ambiguity, multiple interpretation or multiple identity - it is a refusal of dialogue in a
world whose peace and continuity depend on it.
Fundamentalism is a child of globalisation, which it both responds to and utilises.
Fundamentalist groups almost everywhere have made extensive use of new
communications technologies. Before he came to power in Iran, the Ayatollah

6

Khomeini circulated videos and cassettes of his teachings. Hindutwa militants have
made extensive use of the Internet and electronic mail to create a 'feeling of Hindu
identity'.
Whatever form it takes - religious, ethnic, nationalist, or directly political, I think it
right to regard fundamentalism as problematic. It is edged with the possibility of
violence, and it is the enemy of cosmopolitan dialogue. Yet fundamentalism isn't just
the antithesis of globalising modernity, but poses questions to it. The most basic one
is this: can we live in a world where nothing is sacred? I have to say, in conclusion,
that I don't think we can. Cosmopolitans, of whom I count myself one, have to make
plain that tolerance and dialogue can themselves be guided by values of a universal
kind.
All of us need moral commitments that stand above the petty concerns and squabbles
of everyday life. We should be prepared to mount an active defence of these values
wherever they are poorly developed, or threatened. None of us would have anything
to live for, if we didn't have something worth dying for.

7

