REITH LECTURES 1999: Runaway World
Anthony Giddens
Lecture 4: Family
TRANSMISSION: 28 April 1999
Recorded in Washington, DC, for BBC Radio 4
Among all the changes going on today, none are more important than those happening
in our personal lives - in sexuality, emotional life, marriage and the family. There is a
global revolution going on in how we think of ourselves and how we form ties and
connections with others. It is a revolution advancing unevenly in different regions and
cultures, with many resistances. As with other aspects of the runaway world, we don't
know what the ratio of advantages and anxieties will turn out to be. In some ways,
these are the most difficult and disturbing transformations of all. Most of us can tune
out from larger problems for much of the time. We can't opt out, however, from the
swirl of change reaching right into the heart of our emotional lives.
There are few countries in the world where there isn't intense discussion about sexual
equality, the regulation of sexuality and the future of the family. And where there isn't
open debate, this is mostly because it is actively repressed by authoritarian
governments or fundamentalist groups. In many cases, these controversies are
national or local - as are the social and political reactions to them. Politicians and
pressure groups will suggest that if only family policy were modified, if only divorce
were made harder or easier to get in their particular country, solutions to our problems
could readily be found.
But the changes affecting the personal and emotional spheres go far beyond the
borders of any particular country, even one as large as the United States. We find the
same issues almost everywhere, differing only in degree and according to the cultural
context in which they take place.
In China, for example, the state is considering making divorce more difficult. In the
aftermath of the Cultural Revolution, very liberal marriage laws were passed.
Marriage is a working contract, that can be dissolved, I quote: 'when husband and
wife both desire it'.
Even if one partner objects, divorce can be granted when 'mutual affection' has gone
from the marriage. Only a two week wait is required, after which the two pay $4 and
are henceforth independent. The Chinese divorce rate is still low as compared with
Western countries, but it is rising rapidly - as is true in the other developing Asian
societies. In Chinese cities, not only divorce, but cohabitation is becoming more
frequent.
In the vast Chinese countryside, by contrast, everything is different. Marriage and the
family are much more traditional - in spite of the official policy of limiting childbirth

1

through a mixture of incentives and punishment. Marriage is an arrangement between
two families, fixed by the parents rather than the individuals concerned.
A recent study in the province of Gansu, which has only a low level of economic
development, found that 60% of marriages are still arranged by parents. As a Chinese
saying has it: 'meet once, nod your head and marry'. There is a twist in the tail in
modernising China. Many of those currently divorcing in the urban centres were
married in the traditional manner in the country.
In China there is much talk of protecting the family. In many Western countries the
debate is even more shrill. The family is a site for the struggles between tradition and
modernity, but also a metaphor for them. There is perhaps more nostalgia surrounding
the lost haven of the family than for any other institution with its roots in the past.
Politicians and activists routinely diagnose the breakdown of family life and call for a
return to the traditional family.
Now the 'traditional family' is very much a catch-all category. There have been many
different types of family and kinship systems in different societies and cultures. The
Chinese family, for instance, was always distinct from family forms in the West.
Arranged marriage was never as common in most European countries, as in China, or
India. Yet the family in non-modern cultures did, and does, have some features found
more or less everywhere.
The traditional family was above all an economic unit. Agricultural production
normally involved the whole family group, while among the gentry and aristocracy,
transmission of property was the main basis of marriage. In mediaeval Europe,
marriage was not contracted on the basis of sexual love, nor was it regarded as a place
where such love should flourish. As the French historian, Georges Duby, puts it,
marriage in the middle ages was not to involve 'frivolity, passion, or fantasy'.
The inequality of men and women was intrinsic to the traditional family. I don't think
one could overstate the importance of this. In Europe, women were the property of
their husbands or fathers - chattels as defined in law.
In the traditional family, it wasn't only women who lacked rights - children did too.
The idea of enshrining children's rights in law is in historical terms relatively recent.
In premodern periods, as in traditional cultures today, children weren't reared for their
own sake, or for the satisfaction of the parents. One could almost say that children
weren't recognised as individuals. It wasn't that parents didn't love their children, but
they cared about them more for the contribution they made to the common economic
task than for themselves. Moreover, the death rate of children was frightening. In
Colonial America nearly one in four infants died in their first year. Almost 50% didn't
live to age 10.
Except for certain courtly or elite groups, in the traditional family sexuality was
always dominated by reproduction. This was a matter of tradition and nature
combined. The absence of effective contraception meant that for most women
sexuality was inevitably closely connected with childbirth. In many traditional
cultures, including in Western Europe up to the threshold of the 20th Century , a
woman might have 10 or more pregnancies during the course of her life.

2

Sexuality was regulated by the idea of female virtue. The sexual double standard is
often thought of as a creation of the Victorian period. In fact, in one version or
another it was central to almost all non-modern societies. It involved a dualistic view
of female sexuality - a clear cut division between the virtuous woman on the one hand
and the libertine on the other. Sexual promiscuity in many cultures has been taken as a
positive defining feature of masculinity. James Bond is, or was, admired for his sexual
as well as his physical heroism. Sexually adventurous women, by contrast, have
nearly always been beyond the pale, no matter how much influence the mistresses of
some prominent figures might have achieved.
Attitudes towards homosexuality were also governed by a mix of tradition and nature.
Anthropological surveys show that homosexuality - or male homosexuality at any rate
- has been tolerated, or openly approved of, in more cultures than it has been
outlawed. Those societies that have been hostile to homosexuality have usually
condemned it as specifically unnatural. Western attitudes have been more extreme
than most; less than half a century ago homosexuality was still widely regarded as a
perversion and written up as such in manuals of psychiatry.
Antagonism towards homosexuality is still widespread and the dualistic view of
women continues to be held by many - of both sexes. But over the past few decades
the main elements of people's sexual lives in the West have changed in an absolutely
basic way. The separation of sexuality from reproduction is in principle complete.
Sexuality is for the first time something to be discovered, moulded, altered. Sexuality,
which used to be defined so strictly in relation to marriage and legitimacy, now has
little connection to them at all. We should see the increasing acceptance of
homosexuality not just as a tribute to liberal tolerance. It is a logical outcome of the
severance of sexuality from reproduction. Sexuality which has no content is by
definition no longer dominated by heterosexuality.
What most of its defenders in Western countries call the traditional family was in fact
a late, transitional phase in family development in the 1950's. This was a time at
which the proportion of women out at work was still relatively low and when it was
still difficult, especially for women, to obtain divorce without stigma. On the other
hand, men and women by this time were more equal than they had been previously,
both in fact and in law. The family had ceased to be an economic entity and the idea
of romantic love as basis for marriage had replaced marriage as an economic contract.
Since then, the family has changed much further. The details vary from society to
society, but the same trends are visible almost everywhere in the industrialised world.
Only a minority of people now live in what might be called the standard 1950's family
- both parents living together with their children of the marriage, where the mother is
a full time housewife, and the father the breadwinner. In some countries, more than a
third of all births happen outside wedlock, while the proportion of people living alone
has gone up steeply and looks likely to rise even more.
In most societies, like the US, marriage remains popular - the US has aptly been
called a high divorce, high marriage society. In Scandinavia, on the other hand, a
large proportion of people living together, including where children are involved,
remain unmarried. Moreover, up to a quarter of women aged between 18 and 35 in the
US and Europe say they do not intend to have children - and they appear to mean it.

3

Of course in all countries older family forms continue to exist. In the US, many
people, recent immigrants particularly, still live according to traditional values. Most
family life, however, has been transformed by the rise of the couple and coupledom.
Marriage and the family have become what I termed in an earlier lecture shell
institutions. They are still called the same, but inside their basic character has
changed.
In the traditional family, the married couple was only one part, and often not the main
part, of the family system. Ties with children and other relatives tended to be equally
or even more important in the day to day conduct of social life. Today the couple,
married or unmarried, is at the core of what the family is. The couple came to be at
the centre of family life as the economic role of the family dwindled and love, or love
plus sexual attraction, became the basis of forming marriage ties.
A couple once constituted has its own exclusive history, its own biography. It is a unit
based upon emotional communication or intimacy. The idea of intimacy, like so many
other familiar notions I've discussed in these lectures, sounds old but in fact is very
new. Marriage was never in the past based upon intimacy - emotional communication.
No doubt this was important to a good marriage but it was not the foundation of it.
For the couple, it is. Communication is the means of establishing the tie in the first
place and it is the chief rationale for its continuation.
We should recognise what a major transition this is. 'Coupling' and 'uncoupling'
provide a more accurate description of the arena of personal life now than do
'marriage and the family'. A more important question for us than 'are you married?' is
'how good is your relationship?'
The idea of a relationship is also surprisingly recent. Only 30 or so years ago, no one
spoke of 'relationships'. They didn't need to, nor did they need to speak in terms of
intimacy and commitment. Marriage at that time was the commitment, as the
existence of shotgun marriages bore witness. While statistically marriage is still the
normal condition, for most people its meaning has more or less completely changed.
Marriage signifies that a couple is in a stable relationship, and may indeed promote
that stability, since it makes a public declaration of commitment. However, marriage
is no longer the chief defining basis of coupledom.
The position of children in all this is interesting and somewhat paradoxical. Our
attitudes towards children and their protection have altered radically over the past
several generations. We prize children so much partly because they have become so
much rarer, and partly because the decision to have a child is very different from what
it was for previous generations. In the traditional family, children were an economic
benefit. Today in Western countries a child, on the contrary, puts a large financial
burden on the parents. Having a child is more of a distinct and specific decision than
it used to be, and it is a decision guided by psychological and emotional needs. The
worries we have about the effects of divorce upon children, and the existence of many
fatherless families, have to be understood against the background of our much higher
expectations about how children should be cared for and protected.
There are three main areas in which emotional communication, and therefore
intimacy, are replacing the old ties that used to bind together people's personal lives -

4

in sexual and love relations, parent child relations and in friendship. To analyse these,
I want to use the idea of what I call the 'pure relationship'. I mean by this a
relationship based upon emotional communication, where the rewards derived from
such communication are the main basis for the relationship to continue.
I don't mean a sexually pure relationship. Also I don't mean anything that exists in
reality. I'm talking of an abstract idea that helps us understand changes going on in the
world. Each of the three areas just mentioned - sexual relationships, parent-child
relations and friendship - is tending to approximate to this model. Emotional
communication or intimacy, in other words, are becoming the key to what they are all
about.
The pure relationship has quite different dynamics from more traditional social ties. It
depends upon processes of active trust - opening oneself up to the other. Selfdisclosure is the basic condition of intimacy. The pure relationship is also implicitly
democratic. When I was originally working on the study of intimate relationships, I
read a great deal of therapeutic and self-help literature on the subject. I was struck by
something I don't believe has been widely noticed or remarked upon. If one looks at
how a therapist sees a good relationship - in any of the three spheres just mentioned it is striking how direct a parallel there is with public democracy.
A good relationship, of course, is an ideal - most ordinary relationships don't come
even close. I'm not suggesting that our relations with spouses, lovers, children or
friends aren't often messy, conflictful and unsatisfying. But the principles of public
democracy are ideals too, that also often stand at some large distance from reality.
A good relationship is a relationship of equals, where each party has equal rights and
obligations. In such a relationship, each person has respect, and wants the best, for the
other. The pure relationship is based upon communication, so that understanding the
other person's point of view is essential.
Talk, or dialogue, are the basis of making the relationship work. Relationships
function best if people don't hide too much from each other - there has to be mutual
trust. And trust has to be worked at, it can't just be taken for granted.
Finally, a good relationship is one free from arbitrary power, coercion or violence.
Every one of these qualities conforms to the values of democratic politics. In a
democracy, all are in principle equal, and with equality of rights and responsibilities
comes mutual respect. Open dialogue is a core property of democracy. Democratic
systems substitute open discussion of issues - a public space of dialogue - for
authoritarian power, or for the sedimented power of tradition. No democracy can
work without trust. And democracy is undermined if it gives way to authoritarianism
or violence.
When we apply these principles - as ideals, I would stress again - to relationships, we
are talking of something very important - the possible emergence of what I shall call,
a democracy of the emotions in everyday life. A democracy of the emotions, it seems
to me, is as important as public democracy in improving the quality of our lives.
This holds as much in parent-child relations as in other areas. These can't, and
shouldn't, be materially equal. Parents must have authority over children, in
everyone's interests. Yet they should presume an in-principle equality. In a democratic
family, the authority of parents should be based upon an implicit contract. The parent

5

in effect says to the child: 'If you were an adult, and knew what I know, you would
agree that what I ask you to do is legitimate'.
Children in traditional families were - and are - supposed to be seen and not heard.
Many parents, perhaps despairing of their children's rebelliousness, would dearly like
to resurrect that rule. But there isn't any going back to it, nor should there be. In a
democracy of the emotions, children can and should be able to answer back.
An emotional democracy doesn't imply lack of discipline, or absence of authority. It
simply seeks to put them on a different footing.
Something very similar happened in the public sphere, when democracy began to
replace arbitrary government and the rule of force. And like public democracy the
democratic family must be anchored in a stable, yet open, civil society. If I may coin a
phrase - 'It takes a village'.
A democracy of the emotions would draw no distinctions of principle between
heterosexual and same-sex relationships. Gays, rather than heterosexuals, have
actually been pioneers in discovering the new world of relationships and exploring its
possibilities. They have had to be, because when homosexuality came out of the
closet, gays weren't able to depend upon the normal supports of traditional marriage.
They have had to be innovators, often in a hostile environment.
To speak of fostering an emotional democracy doesn't mean being weak about family
duties, or about public policy towards the family. Democracy, after all, means the
acceptance of obligations, as well as rights sanctioned in law. The protection of
children has to be the primary feature of legislation and public policy. Parents should
be legally obliged to provide for their children until adulthood, no matter what living
arrangements they enter into. Marriage is no longer an economic institution, yet as a
ritual commitment it can help stabilise otherwise fragile relationships. If this applies
to heterosexual relationships, I don't see why it shouldn't apply to homosexual ones
too.
There are many questions to be asked of all this - too many to answer in a short
lecture. I have concentrated mainly upon trends affecting the family in Western
countries. What about areas where the traditional family remains largely intact, as in
the example of China with which I began? Will the changes observed in the West
become more and more global?
I think they will - indeed that they are. It isn't a question of whether existing forms of
the traditional family will become modified, but when and how. I would venture even
further. What I have described as an emerging democracy of the emotions is on the
front line in the struggle between cosmopolitanism and fundamentalism that I
described in the last lecture. Equality of the sexes, and the sexual freedom of women,
which are incompatible with the traditional family, are anathema to fundamentalist
groups. Opposition to them, indeed, is one of the defining features of religious
fundamentalism across the world.
There is plenty to be worried about in the state of the family, in Western countries and
elsewhere. It is just as mistaken to say that every family form is as good as any other,
as to argue that the decline of the traditional family is a disaster. I would turn the

6

argument of the political and fundamentalist right on its head. The persistence of the
traditional family - or aspects of it - in many parts of the world is more worrisome
than its decline. For what are the most important forces promoting democracy and
economic development in poorer countries? Well, they are the equality and education
of women. And what must be changed to make these possible? Most importantly,
what must be changed is the traditional family.
In conclusion, I should emphasise that sexual equality is not just a core principle of
democracy. It is also relevant to happiness and fulfilment. Many of the changes
happening to the family are problematic and difficult. But surveys in the US and
Europe show that few want to go back to traditional male and female roles, much less
to legally defined inequality. If ever I were tempted to think that the traditional family
might be best after all, I remember what my great aunt said. She must have had one of
the longest marriages of anyone. She married young, and was with her husband for
over 60 years. She once confided to me that she had been deeply unhappy with him
the whole of that time. In her day there was no escape.

7

