Reith Lectures 2000: Respect for the Earth
Lecture 4: Health & Population - Gro Harlem Brundtland - Geneva

In October last year, the UN Secretary General Kofi Annan went to a hospital in
Sarajevo to welcome "baby number six billion". Nobody - and least of all the
Secretary General - would deny that the choice of Fatima Mevic's baby, born just after
midnight on October 12 had more to do with the Secretary General's travel schedule
than with demographics. We can imagine that Mr and Mrs Mevic were rather
bemused about all the fuss surrounding their little baby boy. The key point, though, is
that Kofi Annan's purpose was not to talk about numbers. For the Secretary General,
this birth was an occasion to focus on a different moral issue.
He said that the "Day of Six Billion" challenged us all "to live up to the promise of
our time to give every man, woman and child an opportunity to make the most of their
abilities, in safety and in dignity."
I share his view. More than that, I have a mission. I want to state it clearly, now, to all
who are listening. I want the fight against poverty to be our global cause as we
straddle the millennium. Our goal must be to create a world where we all can live well
fed and clothed, and with dignity. We must do this without undermining future
generations' ability to do the same.
Tonight I want to suggest a fresh way of joining this fight. I will argue that poor
people will only be able to prosper, and emerge from poverty, if they enjoy better
health. I want health to be at the heart of our struggle for sustainable development.
Let us look around the world as it is now.
About three billion people live on less than two dollars a day. In other words half of
the global population do not have anything close to a decent standard of living. That
means that 3 billion people live in such poverty that they cannot afford proper
housing, proper health care and proper education for their children. Almost half of
those people live on less than one dollar per day. That means more than a billion
people not having enough to eat every day and at constant risk of malnutrition. The
poor really do die young.
Poverty has a woman's face; of the 1.3 billion poorest, only 30% are male. Poor
women are often caught in a damaging cycle of malnutrition and disease. This plight
stems directly from women's place in the home, and in society: it often also reflects
gender bias in health care. Women from poor households are more than a hundred
times more likely to die as a result of childbirth than their wealthier counterparts.
Over the past few years, the human development index has declined in more than 30
countries. Almost one third of all children are undernourished. The average African
household consumes 20% less today than it did 25 years ago! And development
assistance is falling too. Only a few countries have fulfilled past commitments to
provide 0.7 per cent of their GDP for development assistance. In actual fact the world
average is now closer to 0.2 per cent.

Beyond the dry statistics lies tragedy. When I visited Africa some months ago, I saw
first hand the malnourished children and the despair that follows from some of the
conflicts that rage in this continent. These are not so much territorial disputes as they
are rooted in general misery, the aftermath of humanitarian crises, shortages of food
and water and the spreading of poverty and ill-health.
In a number of mega cities around the world, the quality of life among the five, ten,
fifteen million people and the poor who scrape out a living in their vast slums is
dismal. The noise, pollution, squalor and dangers for those who have made their
cardboard housing underneath the large overpasses make modern living for the poor
seem like a latter-day realisation of Hell. The damage from pollution and the
continuous threat of violence add to the infectious diseases which always leave their
deepest imprint on poor people's lives.
Most of us agree that this state of affairs is unacceptable. Yet still we do little or
nothing about it. The rich have lived next door to appalling squalor for centuries
without being sufficiently disturbed to take any action.
But now, in our global economy, this may be beginning to change.
Over the past twenty-five years or so, population growth in many countries has
slowed rather faster than demographers had first expected - especially in east Asia.
Thanks to this slowing down, the experts now believe the earth's population will
stabilise around 9 billion - rather than 12 to 15 billion as some feared.
At the same time, the world's capacity to produce food has grown at a fantastic rate,
as a result of new grain varieties and economic incentives to producers. In 1989 the
Vietnamese government allowed farmers to sell their rice freely on the market,
encouraging new seed varieties and farming techniques. Within two years, Vietnam
went from having to import rice to becoming the world's second largest exporter.
The structure of societies is changing. Young adults in India, Algeria and Iran
struggle to find jobs, to earn an income and to see a hope for the future. The
Governments of Japan, Sweden and Spain struggle to find answers to a rapidly ageing
population, and to the challenge this poses for their production and welfare systems.
Ironically, many developing and middle-income countries are caught with both
problems: they face a swelling population of older folk, while they still have to cope
with population growth.
Years of observation and experience have shown that families living in freedom and
given the opportunity to fulfil their basic needs, have fewer children. These children
are more likely to be healthy and educated. Societies that have satisfied the basic
needs of their populations tend to reduce pollution and environmental destruction.
As population structures change, the role of the State becomes clearer. Empower
people to make meaningful choices. Create a supportive environment for families.
Look after the interests of children, for they are the future. These principles are as
relevant in India as they are in Norway, or indeed Switzerland, where we are tonight.

None of this should surprise us. Ground-breaking consensus was reached six years
ago, when the International Conference on Development and Population - in Cairo firmly established that development, poverty reduction and respect for women's
reproductive rights are vital to stabilising the world's population.
We do not yet, however, have a consensus about the importance of good health in
global development. Europe learned about the existence of infectious agents around
the middle of the 19th century. The importance of hygiene and clean water became
apparent. The rich finally began to do something about the dreadful slums that
surrounded their wealthy areas. It was self-interest that finally prompted action. As
hygiene and health care improved, the average life expectancy increased by nearly 20
years in many countries. Following this development was the huge industrial push
that brought the current wealth and affluence to the West and practically eradicated
absolute poverty from most of Europe.
Unfortunately, the fear of disease that scared politicians, city planners and corporate
leaders to invest in health and sanitation for the populations of Europe, did not then
extend as far as to their former colonies and the other countries far away from their
own cities.
As we learn how to manage a global economy, the situation should change.
Again, as in the 19th century, it is self-interest that lies at the heart of this change. In
the modern world, bacteria and viruses travel almost as fast as money. With
globalisation, a single microbial sea washes all of humankind. There are no health
sanctuaries.
Diseases cannot be kept out of even the richest of countries by rearguard defensive
action. The separation between domestic and international health problems is no
longer useful, as people and goods travel across continents. Two million people cross
international borders every single day, about a tenth of humanity each year. And of
these, more than a million travel from developing to industrialised countries each
week.
This is an accelerating trend, and is not likely to be reversed. I suggest "health
security" is as important as national security. Threats to health undermine what I call
our " human security". The levels of ill-health experienced by most of the world's
people threatens their countries' economic and political viability: this, in turn, affects
economic and political interests of all other countries.
Interestingly enough, not only infectious diseases that spread with globalisation.
Changes in lifestyle and diet prompt an increase in heart disease, diabetes and cancer.
More than anything, tobacco is sweeping the globe as it is criss-crossed by market
forces. Only weeks after the old socialist economies in Europe and Asia opened up to
Western goods and capital, camels and cowboys began to appear on buildings and
billboards.
Those who think that tobacco-related death and disease is mainly a burden for the rich
countries are mistaken. If the growth in tobacco use goes unchecked, the numbers of
deaths related to its use will nearly triple, from four million each year today to 10

million each year in thirty years. More than 70% of this increase will take place in the
developing countries.
The people in most rich and middle income countries have come to expect much
better standards of health in the past fifty years. In that time we have failed miserably
in securing even a basic level of health among the 3 billion who are poor. In the
interval, some of their health problems have become even more difficult to solve.
Recently, in Mozambique, I saw children with their eyes glazed with fever from a
malaria that could have been prevented if their parents could afford bed nets.
Deforestation had changed malaria from a nuisance to a curse in a matter of twenty
years.
More people are suffering from this killing and debilitating disease now than ever
before, and deforestation, climate change and breakdowns in health services have
caused the disease to spread to new areas and areas that have been malaria-free for
decades, like in Europe.
In the Philippines, I have watched how beggars sit exhausted on the pavements
convulsed with coughing. Tuberculosis, which we long believed had been brought
under control by effective treatment, is on the rise again. Increasingly, we see forms
of tuberculosis which are resistant to all but a very expensive cocktail of drugs.
I think that HIV/AIDS may be the most serious threat to face sub-Saharan Africa and
other developing regions. space. Already, the AIDS epidemic is the leading cause of
death in several African countries. AIDS has reversed the increases in life expectancy
we have seen over the past thirty years. The social and economic devastation in
countries that could lose a fifth of their productive populations is heart-rending.
I believe we are facing this alarming situation largely because of an outdated
approach to development. Our theories have to catch up with what our ears and eyes
are telling us - and fast.
There was a period in development thinking - not so long ago - when spending on
public services, such as health and education, would have to wait. Good health was a
luxury, only to be achieved when countries had developed a particular level of
physical infrastructure and established a certain economic strength. The implicit
assumption was that health was to do with consumption. Experience and research
over the past few years have shown that such thinking was at best simplistic, and at
worst plainly wrong.
I maintain that if people's health improves, they make a real contribution to their
nation's prosperity. In my judgement, good health is not only an important concern for
individuals, it plays a central role in achieving sustainable economic growth and an
effective use of resources.
As in Europe at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century, we have seen
that developing countries which invest relatively more, and well, on health are likely
to achieve higher economic growth.

In East Asia, for example, life expectancy increased by over 18 years in the two
decades that preceded the most dramatic economic take-off in history.
A recent analysis for the Asian Development Bank concluded that fully a third of the
phenomenal Asian economic growth between 1965 and 1997 resulted from these
gains.
I am rarely able to persuade people to share these views using just moral arguments. I
have much more confidence in what I will describe as "enlightened self interest".
We all fear the spread of disease and increasingly, corporations appreciate the market
opportunities provided by affluent populations. This encourages investment in health
as a means of reducing poverty.
Think about it. Globalisation is about much more than trade. It is about
communicating with an infinity of new people, about relating to them - and therefore
also getting involved in their lives.
The company which sets up a production plant in Vietnam or Peru may do so based
on an evaluation of economic opportunities, but it will soon find itself having to relate
to the political, social and economic reality of the country.
One large engineering company ran an advertising campaign some time ago saying
that being global meant being local world-wide. True. Companies that show
commitment to the countries and communities they work with find that they are better
appreciated - whether by prime ministers or their own work force. Productivity
increases too.
A company that deals with developing countries has to confront the challenge of
poverty and ill-health. A company's stock price can fall on Wall Street because
workers in a subsidiary's plant in Malaysia are not provided with health insurance. As
communication and social activism become globalised, large companies find that
labour standards are important. Ignoring them can be costly both to public image and
stock price.
We need an enlightened response to the challenge of a "managed global economy"
New technology, almost inflation-less growth and soaring stock markets in many
Western countries have created an almost dizzying sensation that the old rules don't
apply anymore. Sometimes I wonder what has happened to the ideologies that used to
guide us. Marx is dead, Adam Smith is certainly gone, and so it seems has every
economist who ever provided any rules for decision-makers to follow. For pessimists,
there may be much to worry about, but for anyone with belief in human creativity,
these are times of opportunity.
Several countries - including the United States - now recognise that improving
international levels of health is a matter of national security. Earlier this year, the
Security Council met and discussed the global AIDS epidemic. The rationale for
debating global health, has indeed changed.

Also, with less than four hundred billionaires holding assets that equal the cumulative
worth of 45% of the world's population, we start to see a change in the flow of
resources for poverty reduction. There are many implications of this extremely
skewed distribution of wealth. One of the positive ones is the emergence, among these
billionaires, of individuals who have philanthropic ambitions. Any one of them could
single-handedly can cover the cost of eradicating - or at least controlling - a lifethreatening disease.
I am delighted to see unorthodox new alliances being forged to support human
development.
Industry and international agencies are coming together to find ways to get medicines
and vaccines to those who cannot afford to pay. They have established new
partnerships to fight malaria, river blindness and leprosy. As they reform their health
care systems, governments build networks that involve the private and voluntary
sectors to get vital services to people in need.
I am not so naïve as to believe that our world has, all of a sudden, become a more
altruistic place. But there are many new possibilities.
We need to bring the new approaches into the mainstream of development activity.
Many international organisations still have no adequate mechanisms for working
beyond the country level, reaching directly to communities in need. We also find it
hard to work for people ruled by corrupt despots, by weak leaders caught up in powerstruggles, or by plain war-lords. As Chris Patten has already argued in this lecture
series, sustainable development cannot work without good governance.
So, in all our efforts we have to give special attention to the challenge of reducing
poverty. The Nobel economics prize laureate Amartya Sen defines poverty as
"deprivation of capability". He argues that people are poor not only because their
income is low, but because they do not have access to basic services, such as health
and education, which would have increased their freedom. Poverty, he says, seriously
deprives people of a number of choices they must have available in order to live a
satisfying life.
This must be right. If you don't have an adequate form of health insurance, becoming
ill means becoming poorer - both directly, because you have to spend part of your
income to pay for treatment and medicines, and indirectly, because your choices
become even more limited.
The challenge for us all is to look at the world through the eyes - and spirit - of poor
people. We need to start with poor people's realities, and trace upwards and outwards
to design services that really make a difference to their lives, as Deepa Narayan
suggests in a recent book, Voices Of The Poor.
Quite simply, poor people all over the world dread being ill. It can so easily be a
disaster. It can throw a whole family into destitution. Poor people have very limited
choices. Medicine costs, fees charged by health workers, and transport costs quickly
eat into whatever funds are available.

A rickshaw driver in Khulna, Bangladesh may well appreciate that he lives in a place
where the risk of tuberculosis is high. But his poverty deprives him of the choice to
live somewhere else. When he gets infected, he cannot compete so well for work. His
income goes down. This sends the family into a spiral of debt and increasing poverty.
His children - particularly the girls - may be kept from school. The family may have
to cut out fish from their meals most days. Their malnutrition increases vulnerability
to illness - and risk of death.
Being too poor to go to an ordinary bank, the family has to borrow from loan sharks
who take perhaps 20% interest, perhaps 60% or more, in order to pay for medicines.
With such costs, our rickshaw driver understandably chooses to cut the treatment as
soon as the fever goes down and he feels better. It is likely that the infection will
return, though next time resistant to the normal drugs used for treatment. The health
of others, who live nearby, is in real danger.
It does not have to be like this. There are examples of TB programmes that work
properly for poor people. They would help our rickshaw driver to be cured in six or
nine months, and enable him to get back to work - non-infectious - within weeks. He
would be able to avoid crippling debt. He would not need to take his children out of
school. His own poverty, and that of his family, would be reduced.
Take another example. Plantation workers in Indonesia were treated for chronic
anaemia was has been reported to result in a 20% increase in productivity, increasing
the earnings of the workers and the output of the plantation.
Relatively simple health interventions, like effective treatment for TB, getting a bed
net against malaria in every African household, eradicating polio, or providing an
integrated child health programme, can ensure that children are healthy and well
nourished. They also improve the economic situation and productivity of individual
households.
Quite simply, we have - in our hands - a concrete, result-oriented, and measurable
way of starting to reduce poverty.
To complete the task, education and infrastructure should improve. Private investment
and trade must increase. But good health is a pre-requisite. Unless we help improve
the health of the world's poorest billion and a half people, they are destined to live
lives of continuing poverty.
All this means that health must be moved from the periphery of the development
process to the centre, where it belongs.
The health minister must not sit at the far end of the Cabinet table, but be up there
next to the prime minister or president, together with the finance minister and
planning and industry minister. In developing countries, they often cannot even be
found at the Cabinet table. This, surely, is where they are most needed.
Are we ready to scale up our investments in poor people's health? - investments vital
for sustainable development?

Think about it. Great advance in health care have been made over the past hundred
years. Our generation risks going down in history as the one that allowed the hardwon health achievements of the 20th century to be lost - lost because it decided to
ignore the billion and a half people that had been excluded from the health revolution.
I use the word "decided" - because we can't say we failed to act because we didn't
know better.
The evidence is there - and so are the opportunities. I challenge you to accept this new
thinking and act on it.

