Reith Lectures 2000: Respect for the Earth
Lecture 5: Poverty & Globalisation - Vandana Shiva - Delhi

Recently, I was visiting Bhatinda in Punjab because of an epidemic of farmers
suicides. Punjab used to be the most prosperous agricultural region in India. Today
every farmer is in debt and despair. Vast stretches of land have become water-logged
desert. And as an old farmer pointed out, even the trees have stopped bearing fruit
because heavy use of pesticides have killed the pollinators - the bees and butterflies.
And Punjab is not alone in experiencing this ecological and social disaster. Last year I
was in Warangal, Andhra Pradesh where farmers have also been committing suicide.
Farmers who traditionally grew pulses and millets and paddy have been lured by seed
companies to buy hybrid cotton seeds referred to by the seed merchants as "white
gold", which were supposed to make them millionaires. Instead they became paupers.
Their native seeds have been displaced with new hybrids which cannot be saved and
need to be purchased every year at high cost. Hybrids are also very vulnerable to pest
attacks. Spending on pesticides in Warangal has shot up 2000 per cent from $2.5
million in the 1980s to $50 million in 1997. Now farmers are consuming the same
pesticides as a way of killing themselves so that they can escape permanently from
unpayable debt.
The corporations are now trying to introduce genetically engineered seed which will
further increase costs and ecological risks. That is why farmers like Malla Reddy of
the Andhra Pradesh Farmers' Union had uprooted Monsanto's genetically engineered
Bollgard cotton in Warangal.
On March 27th, 25 year old Betavati Ratan took his life because he could not pay
pack debts for drilling a deep tube well on his two-acre farm. The wells are now dry,
as are the wells in Gujarat and Rajasthan where more than 50 million people face a
water famine.
The drought is not a "natural disaster". It is "man-made". It is the result of mining of
scarce ground water in arid regions to grow thirsty cash crops for exports instead of
water prudent food crops for local needs.
It is experiences such as these which tell me that we are so wrong to be smug about
the new global economy. I will argue in this lecture that it is time to stop and think
about the impact of globalisation on the lives of ordinary people. This is vital to
achieve sustainability.
Seattle and the World Trade Organisation protests last year have forced everyone to
think again. Throughout this lecture series people have referred to different aspects of
sustainable development taking globalisation for granted. For me it is now time
radically to re-evaluate what we are doing. For what we are doing in the name of
globalisation to the poor is brutal and unforgivable. This is specially evident in India
as we witness the unfolding disasters of globalisation, especially in food and
agriculture.

Who feeds the world? My answer is very different to that given by most people.
It is women and small farmers working with biodiversity who are the primary food
providers in the Third World, and contrary to the dominant assumption, their
biodiversity based small farms are more productive than industrial monocultures.
The rich diversity and sustainable systems of food production are being destroyed in
the name of increasing food production. However, with the destruction of diversity,
rich sources of nutrition disappear. When measured in terms of nutrition per acre, and
from the perspective biodiversity, the so called "high yields" of industrial agriculture
or industrial fisheries do not imply more production of food and nutrition.
Yields usually refers to production per unit area of a single crop. Output refers to the
total production of diverse crops and products. Planting only one crop in the entire
field as a monoculture will of course increase its individual yield. Planting multiple
crops in a mixture will have low yields of individual crops, but will have high total
output of food. Yields have been defined in such a way as to make the food
production on small farms by small farmers disappear. This hides the production by
millions of women farmers in the Third World - farmers like those in my native
Himalaya who fought against logging in the Chipko movement, who in their terraced
fields even today grow Jhangora (barnyard millet), Marsha (Amaranth), Tur (Pigeon
Pea), Urad (Black gram), Gahat (horse gram), Soya Bean (Glycine Max), Bhat
(Glycine Soya) - endless diversity in their fields. From the biodiversity perspective,
biodiversity based productivity is higher than monoculture productivity. I call this
blindness to the high productivity of diversity a "Monoculture of the Mind", which
creates monocultures in our fields and in our world.
The Mayan peasants in the Chiapas are characterised as unproductive because they
produce only 2 tons of corn per acre. However, the overall food output is 20 tons per
acre when the diversity of their beans and squashes, their vegetables their fruit trees
are taken into account.
In Java, small farmers cultivate 607 species in their home gardens. In sub-Saharan
Africa, women cultivate 120 different plants. A single home garden in Thailand has
230 species, and African home gardens have more than 60 species of trees.
Rural families in the Congo eat leaves from more than 50 species of their farm trees.
A study in eastern Nigeria found that home gardens occupying only 2 per cent of a
household's farmland accounted for half of the farm's total output. In Indonesia 20 per
cent of household income and 40 per cent of domestic food supplies come from the
home gardens managed by women.
Research done by FAO has shown that small biodiverse farms can produce thousands
of times more food than large, industrial monocultures.
And diversity in addition to giving more food is the best strategy for preventing
drought and desertification.

What the world needs to feed a growing population sustainably is biodiversity
intensification, not the chemical intensification or the intensification of genetic
engineering. While women and small peasants feed the world through biodiversity we
are repeatedly told that without genetic engineering and globalisation of agriculture
the world will starve. In spite of all empirical evidence showing that genetic
engineering does not produce more food and in fact often leads to a yield decline, it is
constantly promoted as the only alternative available for feeding the hungry.
That is why I ask, who feeds the world?
This deliberate blindness to diversity, the blindness to nature's production, production
by women, production by Third World farmers allows destruction and appropriation
to be projected as creation.
Take the case of the much flouted "golden rice" or genetically engineered Vitamin A
rice as a cure for blindness. It is assumed that without genetic engineering we cannot
remove Vitamin A deficiency. However, nature gives us abundant and diverse sources
of vitamin A. If rice was not polished, rice itself would provide Vitamin A. If
herbicides were not sprayed on our wheat fields, we would have bathua, amaranth,
mustard leaves as delicious and nutritious greens that provide Vitamin A.
Women in Bengal use more than 150 plants as greens - Hinche sak (Enhydra
fluctuans), Palang sak (Spinacea oleracea), Tak palang (Rumex vesicarious), Lal Sak
(Amaranthus gangeticus) - to name but a few.
But the myth of creation presents biotechnologists as the creators of Vitamin A,
negating nature's diverse gifts and women's knowledge of how to use this diversity to
feed their children and families. The most efficient means of rendering the destruction
of nature, local economies and small autonomous producers is by rendering their
production invisible.
Women who produce for their families and communities are treated as `nonproductive' and `economically' inactive. The devaluation of women's work, and of
work done in sustainable economies, is the natural outcome of a system constructed
by capitalist patriarchy. This is how globalisation destroys local economies and
destruction itself is counted as growth.
And women themselves are devalued. Because many women in the rural and
indigenous communities work co-operatively with nature's processes, their work is
often contradictory to the dominant market driven `development' and trade policies.
And because work that satisfies needs and ensures sustenance is devalued in general,
there is less nurturing of life and life support systems.
The devaluation and invisibility of sustainable, regenerative production is most
glaring in the area of food. While patriarchal division of labour has assigned women
the role of feeding their families and communities, patriarchal economics and
patriarchal views of science and technology magically make women's work in
providing food disappear. "Feeding the World" becomes disassociated from the
women who actually do it and is projected as dependent on global agribusiness and
biotechnology corporations.

However, industrialisation and genetic engineering of food and globalisation of trade
in agriculture are recipes for creating hunger, not for feeding the poor.
Everywhere, food production is becoming a negative economy, with farmers spending
more to buy costly inputs for industrial production than the price they receive for their
produce. The consequence is rising debts and epidemics of suicides in both poor and
rich countries.
Economic globalisation is leading to a concentration of the seed industry, increased
use of pesticides, and, finally, increased debt. Capital-intensive, corporate controlled
agriculture is being spread into regions where peasants are poor but, until now, have
been self-sufficient in food. In the regions where industrial agriculture has been
introduced through globalisation, higher costs are making it virtually impossible for
small farmers to survive.
The globalisation of non-sustainable industrial agriculture is literally evaporating the
incomes of Third World farmers through a combination of devaluation of currencies,
increase in costs of production and a collapse in commodity prices.
Farmers everywhere are being paid a fraction of what they received for the same
commodity a decade ago. The Canadian National Farmers Union put it like this in a
report to the senate this year:
"While the farmers growing cereal grains - wheat, oats, corn - earn negative returns
and are pushed close to bankruptcy, the companies that make breakfast cereals reap
huge profits. In 1998, cereal companies Kellogg's, Quaker Oats, and General Mills
enjoyed return on equity rates of 56%, 165% and 222% respectively. While a bushel
of corn sold for less than $4, a bushel of corn flakes sold for $133 ... Maybe farmers
are making too little because others are taking too much."
And a World Bank report has admitted that "behind the polarisation of domestic
consumer prices and world prices is the presence of large trading companies in
international commodity markets."
While farmers earn less, consumers pay more. In India, food prices have doubled
between 1999 and 2000. The consumption of food grains in rural areas has dropped
by 12%. Increased economic growth through global commerce is based on pseudo
surpluses. More food is being traded while the poor are consuming less. When growth
increases poverty, when real production becomes a negative economy, and
speculators are defined as "wealth creators", something has gone wrong with the
concepts and categories of wealth and wealth creation. Pushing the real production by
nature and people into a negative economy implies that production of real goods and
services is declining, creating deeper poverty for the millions who are not part of the
dot.com route to instant wealth creation.
Women - as I have said - are the primary food producers and food processors in the
world. However, their work in production and processing is now becoming invisible.
Recently, the McKinsey corporation said: "American food giants recognise that
Indian agro-business has lots of room to grow, especially in food processing. India

processes a minuscule 1 per cent of the food it grows compared with 70 per cent for
the U.S...".
It is not that we Indians eat our food raw. Global consultants fail to see the 99 per cent
food processing done by women at household level, or by the small cottage industry
because it is not controlled by global agribusiness. 99% of India's agroprocessing has
been intentionally kept at the small level. Now , under the pressure of globalisation,
things are changing. Pseudo hygiene laws are being uses to shut down local
economies and small scale processing.
In August 1998, small scale local processing of edible oil was banned in India through
a "packaging order" which made sale of open oil illegal and required all oil to be
packaged in plastic or aluminium. This shut down tiny "ghanis" or cold pressed mills.
It destroyed the market for our diverse oilseeds - mustard, linseed, sesame, groundnut,
coconut.
And the take-over of the edible oil industry has affected 10 million livelihoods. The
take over of flour or "atta" by packaged branded flour will cost 100 million
livelihoods. And these millions are being pushed into new poverty.
The forced use of packaging will increase the environmental burden of millions of
tonnes of waste.
The globalisation of the food system is destroying the diversity of local food cultures
and local food economies. A global monoculture is being forced on people by
defining everything that is fresh, local and handmade as a health hazard. Human
hands are being defined as the worst contaminants, and work for human hands is
being outlawed, to be replaced by machines and chemicals bought from global
corporations. These are not recipes for feeding the world, but stealing livelihoods
from the poor to create markets for the powerful.
People are being perceived as parasites, to be exterminated for the "health" of the
global economy.
In the process new health and ecological hazards are being forced on Third World
people through dumping of genetically engineered foods and other hazardous
products.
Recently, because of a W.T.O. ruling, India has been forced to remove restrictions on
all imports. Among the unrestricted imports are carcasses and animal waste parts that
create a threat to our culture and introduce public health hazards such as the Mad Cow
Disease.
The US Centre for Disease Prevention in Atlanta has calculated that nearly 81 million
cases of food borne illnesses occur in the US every year. Deaths from food poisoning
have gone up more up more than four times due to deregulation. Most of these
infections are caused by factory farmed meat. The US slaughters 93 million pigs,
thirty seven million cattle, two million calves, six million horses, goats and sheep and
eight billion chickens and turkeys each year.

Now the giant meat industry of US wants to dump contaminated meat produced
through violent and cruel methods on Indian consumers.
The waste of the rich is being dumped on the poor. The wealth of the poor is being
violently appropriated through new and clever means like patents on biodiversity and
indigenous knowledge.
Patents and intellectual property rights are supposed to be granted for novel
inventions. But patents are being claimed for rice varieties such as the basmati for
which my Valley - where I was born - is famous, or pesticides derived from the Neem
which our mothers and grandmothers have been using.
Rice Tec, a U.S. based company has been granted Patent no. 5,663,484 for basmati
rice lines and grains.
Basmati, neem, pepper, bitter gourd, turmeric.......every aspect of the innovation
embodied in our indigenous food and medicinal systems is now being pirated and
patented. The knowledge of the poor is being converted into the property of global
corporations, creating a situation where the poor will have to pay for the seeds and
medicines they have evolved and have used to meet their own needs for nutrition and
health care.
Such false claims to creation are now the global norm, with the Trade Related
Intellectual Property Rights Agreement of World Trade Organisation forcing
countries to introduce regimes that allow patenting of life forms and indigenous
knowledge.
Instead of recognising that commercial interests build on nature and on the
contribution of other cultures, global law has enshrined the patriarchal myth of
creation to create new property rights to life forms just as colonialism used the myth
of discovery as the basis of the take over of the land of others as colonies.
Humans do not create life when they manipulate it. Rice Tec's claim that it has made
"an instant invention of a novel rice line", or Roslin Institute's claim that Ian Wilmut
"created" Dolly denies the creativity of nature, the self-organisational capacity of life
forms, and the prior innovations of Third World communities.
Patents and intellectual property rights are supposed to prevent piracy. Instead they
are becoming the instruments of pirating the common traditional knowledge from the
poor of the Third World and making it the exclusive "property" of western scientists
and corporations.
When patents are granted for seeds and plants, as in the case of basmati, theft is
defined as creation, and saving and sharing seed is defined as theft of intellectual
property. Corporations which have broad patents on crops such as cotton, soya bean,
mustard are suing farmers for seed saving and hiring detective agencies to find out if
farmers have saved seed or shared it with neighbours.

The recent announcement that Monsanto is giving away the rice genome for free is
misleading, because Monsanto has never made a commitment that it will never patent
rice varieties or any other crop varieties.
Sharing and exchange, the basis of our humanity and of our ecological survival has
been redefined as a crime. This makes us all poor.
Nature has given us abundance, women's indigenous knowledge of biodiversity,
agriculture and nutrition has built on that abundance to create more from less, to
create growth through sharing.
The poor are pushed into deeper poverty by making them pay for what was theirs.
Even the rich are poorer because their profits are based on the theft and on the use of
coercion and violence. This is not wealth creation but plunder.
Sustainability requires the protection of all species and all people and the recognition
that diverse species and diverse people play an essential role in maintaining ecological
processes. Pollinators are critical to fertilisation and generation of plants. Biodiversity
in fields provides vegetables, fodder, medicine and protection to the soil from water
and wind erosion.
As humans travel further down the road to non-sustainability, they become intolerant
of other species and blind to their vital role in our survival.
In 1992, when Indian farmers destroyed Cargill's seed plant in Bellary, Karnataka, to
protest against seed failure, the Cargill Chief Executive stated, "We bring Indian
farmers smart technologies which prevent bees from usurping the pollen". When I
was participating in the United Nations Biosafety Negotiations, Monsanto circulated
literature to defend its herbicide resistant Roundup ready crops on grounds that they
prevent "weeds from stealing the sunshine". But what Monsanto calls weeds are the
green fields that provide Vitamin A rice and prevent blindness in children and
anaemia in women.
A worldview that defines pollination as "theft by bees" and claims biodiversity
"steals" sunshine is a worldview which itself aims at stealing nature's harvest by
replacing open, pollinated varieties with hybrids and sterile seeds, and destroying
biodiverse flora with herbicides such as Roundup. The threat posed to the Monarch
butterfly by genetically engineered bt crops is just one example of the ecological
poverty created by the new biotechnologies. As butterflies and bees disappear,
production is undermined. As biodiversity disappears, with it go sources of nutrition
and food.
When giant corporations view small peasants and bees as thieves, and through trade
rules and new technologies seek the right to exterminate them, humanity has reached
a dangerous threshold. The imperative to stamp out the smallest insect, the smallest
plant, the smallest peasant comes from a deep fear - the fear of everything that is alive
and free. And this deep insecurity and fear is unleashing the violence against all
people and all species.

The global free trade economy has become a threat to sustainability and the very
survival of the poor and other species is at stake not just as a side effect or as an
exception but in a systemic way through a restructuring of our worldview at the most
fundamental level. Sustainability, sharing and survival is being economically
outlawed in the name of market competitiveness and market efficiency.
I want to argue here tonight that we need to urgently bring the planet and people back
into the picture.
The world can be fed only by feeding all beings that make the world.
In giving food to other beings and species we maintain conditions for our own food
security. In feeding earthworms we feed ourselves. In feeding cows, we feed the soil,
and in providing food for the soil, we provide food for humans. This worldview of
abundance is based on sharing and on a deep awareness of humans as members of the
earth family. This awareness that in impoverishing other beings, we impoverish
ourselves and in nourishing other beings, we nourish ourselves is the real basis of
sustainability.
The sustainability challenge for the new millennium is whether global economic man
can move out of the worldview based on fear and scarcity, monocultures and
monopolies, appropriation and dispossession and shift to a view based on abundance
and sharing, diversity and decentralisation, and respect and dignity for all beings.
Sustainability demands that we move out of the economic trap that is leaving no space
for other species and other people. Economic Globalisation has become a war against
nature and the poor. But the rules of globalisation are not god - given. They can be
changed. They must be changed. We must bring this war to an end.
Since Seattle, a frequently used phrase has been the need for a rule based system.
Globalisation is the rule of commerce and it has elevated Wall Street to be the only
source of value. As a result things that should have high worth - nature, culture, the
future are being devalued and destroyed. The rules of globalisation are undermining
the rules of justice and sustainability, of compassion and sharing. We have to move
from market totalitarianism to an earth democracy.
We can survive as a species only if we live by the rules of the biosphere. The
biosphere has enough for everyone's needs if the global economy respects the limits
set by sustainability and justice.
As Gandhi had reminded us: "The earth has enough for everyone's needs, but not for
some people's greed".

