this is a cold carlos from the odd coates of the b. b. c. to recollect chairs can select chat didn't seize the end of each different light ,comma cut could was agreed in april it cost him two thousand to one evening a disenchantment tonight when they ended all night and it held spring ,comma the party is subject to these cities are finding the snatches of easy agents and their argument is that aging is knighted inevitable nall necessary for me to not just among scientists yet told spring ,comma is one of the well is beating his accent is its demented gene watson on the nobel prize of cool stuff to the discovery of the structure of d. n. a. and the finance afterlife is the title and on a two to ninety to not only in some many distinguished scientists and others who see injustice object is perhaps more personal beat another lets like human meet many of whom would like to know how long they might've what life might be ninety contends bought health in austin to aging when their rooms to help satisfy some of our curiosity and helps fiji to now is you do not come in madison who has died at eighty is a professional passion that offense at midseason intended gerontology at new casa unit asked in the northeast kingdom to the b. b. c. to the prefecture at two thousand to one tang had quit hack deepening we sometimes saying it extreme is the cousin's life hangs by a great in fact all allow lives hang by a thread of all the time the threading questioned tuesday in a medium through which we inherit a genetic destiny d. n. a. directs that growth and along the vital processes in which we depend for survival d. n. a. is the thread of life residuals and the parade of debt does d. n. a. can trot are end as the controls that beginning in my first match at i describe the revolution in human longevity that has taken place over the last few generations tonight this i shouldn't have a companion resolution in the life sciences are repetition that as it unfolded with breathtaking speed of the vote last toss entering a witch's bookseller rated greatly intellect it is this revolution that would allow last decade and disband the role of d. n. a. in the aging process when the first drop in the human genome was announced and twenty six june last year the wells press green chile stew the prospect of continuing even accelerating the postponement of death that had been the great success story of the twentieth century this enthusiasm was reflected in ripples of intel and cool between president clinton and prime minister left in which the president congratulated the prime minister that he's made recently and had access credit gained twenty five he is in life expectancy politicians' promises and not always the best of it as a future reality but the personal nature of the president's message suggests he was in sierra was huron opts in what we've come a if claim is that even longer life spans and just around the corner in a place that you will roll it out lineups by the c. s. of old it combines power up and told rubin that the issues that ma stacked and sent them to affect on the one hand d. n. a. is the medium in which a genetic endowment is written it is the information could get and how his son a d. n. a. sequence which weakened profit presence or absence of critical and gene variants will slowly move isms that might affect deputy seen in this bind tucked in a place that thinks groped in each of our lives are interested in the differences between what a person's d. n. a. and a novelist and a lot of these ten last about biological individuality that assault the n. a. is by no means as constant as we might wish d. n. a. is awaiting molecule to which s. sells referred continually is not some dusty timed tucked away in the reference section of the self but a hiatus of activity more kin to a busy internet web site just like a website to dicks periods is a continual stream of hits busted the skates thomas' request that they accept involving simply a readout of the genetic strain of the bay's cease cheese and teased lighted the strings of zeros and ones that are downloaded from web sites but stopped a real hicks by agents of damage which resulted in not sting hong it's these mass eights with clothes that information coded in acting in a typical car robert didn't with the passage of time and it may need these hints that closest to hate each if we don't address to the voter pool side of d. n. a. that i knew some afraid is that even as i speak your d. n. a. is in trouble as i spent the last sentence the d. n. a. knew what experience in treating the amidst damaging hits it attack rate to a d. n. a. has been estimated at ten thousand damaging hits his cell that day that a body comprises about one hundred thousand didion sales so that ,comma she is considerable that lets you worry on duty that issuing a white house that even as he cheated latins who said their emergency said this is a roman lookout for trouble and putting it right but the disease systems often note that it and some of that damage will persist during the election tonight to use up about one tenth of his songs pop of one percent of your life expectancy is not a lost en un phoenix but not the grain of sand would've cost through the colony last view of life that didn't that string listed this damaged judea nasal suture we tend to think about such a nice friend drove in five of the day it's dangerous out when a light my fire on a cold winter evening its the chemical reaction of the office in june with column that makes the call's stiletto halts that if a stock which was dated from the top the same oxygen might be in the house down inside the cells of abba is thousands of my new instructions cooled my two ,comma korea use oxygen to produce energy and the same oxygen will set a pretty sees it trying to stop the tide is sales went to school is so the bidding is in reality it got kind of effect but the scalloped schooled free radicals unnoticed distracted to being surrounded by water free radical damage whenever they talk show including idea may we have a great reason to believe that it's the bolsa disadvantaged close by free radicals which place important roles in beijing know the damage to d. n. a. is close by oxygen of ghosts there are other factors that regularly damage d. n. a. likes sun or light to tobacco smoke norris d. n. a. beat an early target of free radicals out membranes and proteins get kicked in the midst idea made a lot will have a lasting effect because the occasional hits that failed to get him fit correctly can lead to a permanent alteration in the d. n. a. sequence in this respect to their easy you with which the d. n. a. repair systems got it in exchange can be our undoing since what's the sequence is changed its than you did the right knee a sequence that becomes the o. j. to the protection busted childhood game of chinese whispers this popular top toxins by expecting not the first land makes up a story in whispers that into the second has yet the second letter was visiting the that plays here and so by the time the messages come around the original tale of how deceased pact got shot to the coast at might well be an account of the blue caps with a stop ,comma debts had d. n. a. places and vicious chinese whispers all the time it's quite possible that there is no long got a single cell in your body that has exactly the same d. n. a. sequence as that which was a new when you began your life as a fertilized egg bust is the story of owner didn't need that howdy slings and arrows of outrageous pulled shimbun relentlessly attack d. n. a. that d. n. a. is also a monster of its destiny if you let it go i showed you the list of the d. n. a. damage hurricane closing mayhem annual sales will be put right it will be put right because you can get a new team and our instructions for extremely sophisticated d. n. a. repair at you might reasonably asked why if you give a sense mopped it doesn't keep you deming fret about the humbling bonsai peace exist ,comma to people that as we saw in my previous act up our evolutionary nance says is that it's a time when life was typically brutish and short in such settings that says the body was likely to die soon from and accidental coldest rendering any idea or potential immortality somewhat hypothetical maintenance is income she and reproduction was more important so human d. n. a. in its role is monstrous feel faint skimmed over the maintenance and tree to do what he is disposable it's going to think the weak page because our ancestral jeans attached limited importance to our individual so vital that we can unleash take comfort from the fact we did a good deal long got than most of our companions species on this product is a message he pets soon grow used to a succession of hammocks does buy cheese pacts and oaks in outlines its and the giant told just isn't as issues they get good shots to feel the same way about that keep us last the disparity in the life spans of species is scientifically very audible to we contest ideas about genetic practice that control the rate of aging by comparing species that page frost with species that page most lending pioneering web cam in the nineteen seventies found that sales from lowly species update upped its d. n. a. repair themselves from shortlived hopes and it's since been confounded many noble or treats including iowa and the cells from donated animals that generally backed up at maintaining and protecting themselves during the last decade we seem exciting weather being done with simple innocence by fruit flies and brown well on its witch's shetland loaded mutants in these species generally gained their extended longevity from genetic alterations that increase the capacity to resist or repaired damage it's attractive to think the what amusement round when it comes to we might be able to do for us selves before we left our imaginations run away with the possibilities of boundless extension of life it's whether beijing about just how we might know about what a place to stop will be trying to identify the genetic determinants of human longevity from among the foster right estai except now emerging from the human genome project are strong indications that the senate should the genetic determinants of human longevity will not be proved less twin reception that favored to of the human geneticist is shannon mama's psychotic twins with a low of eight genes in common happen like spends the most eminent the notice of die zeit tossing twins who shed just fifty percent of the genes in time to study in a recent report based on analysis of beating top automation of iceland has come to similar conclusions that the study's bulls that reveal a life span is not inherited geddes create custom and out as blood groups all the palace of brittle mantle's famous piece the genetic studies show that the inheritance of human life span is not that strong that it is the genes account for in the embattled holds up a one to ten minutes of length about life's visit :colon misconception that as soon as we begin to troll the gene pool to genes that affect the aging process we will dish out genus fuller of aging genes floral out simon's disease genes fuller osteoarthritis and so on the reality is that we must not liking to discovered genes for any of these traits the idea that there exists a jeans for paging was not some ahead hoffa's entry day by the nobel laureates beat him in a well but is taking a long time to die in will rather up like count dracula u. keats right scene from the dead the reality is that the boss majority of wild animals dying young battle is not a need to to told genes for arranging for example to control population size know it is better at all the chin as he to doucette fall from insulting genes for arranging animals get bolt genes for longevity as animals became bessette it dived into their environments and less able to avoid some of the danger is there and it became what welsh wing based in things like that idea in a room packed what we recognize that the genes we miss seemed a jeans for longevity knauss eighteen i toss becomes more realistic burdens second time will complicate we can expect tens or even ,comma prints of genes to be involved in the network's of maintenance systems that keep us alive when kingdom out diskettes are part of any new east gene technologies it so high the sophisticated computations what's true for arranging his elusive truth of the diseases of later life it makes no sense to think intensive genes for alzheimer's disease except in rare salmon is budgeting two limitations prettiest and usually that the onset even in these cases the genes which mutated problem regional colas the disease that made a good center raked its progression to understand the real underlying poses of conditions like alzheimer's and osteoarthritis women's pro to the weakening seemed teaneck works that probably evolved as a good and all hong with cheney's dodo backed panes of the circumstances this is strikingly illustrated by the gene that codes for the sickle cell there and the hemoglobin intimate enrile west africa this sickle cell gene confetti protection against feet up on those who inherited just one copy but tossed that imposing a crippling blow to sort out on those who inherited two inset in status is where the risk of infection with malaria was hiding the scales of natural selection would tend to its fate up of maintaining a relatively high frequency of the sickle cell gene would be in the population but times change and people of west african origin who didn't know what mariel regions now run the risk of sickle cell disease is not ultimate legacy of pasta evolutionary adopted much the same may be true to genes which predispose estimate likes diseases up priming sell food can be found if we'd had our attention to the varied tapes of the thread of life one of the crisis is that we believe may have a role to play an aging is the right to last the d. n. a. sequence from the band's about chromosomes are to meet its sales to the right wing of unprincipled hunt at a rest this declining by the throat of a genetic switch but we'll send a good throwing this could take less which is one of the things that are dear range salad is when it becomes malignant is growing belief among those who study said the arranging the right to a loss of d. n. a. from acting in this and what it is made to get a chest is a price that jeanne m. agreed to pay in order to protect aspects of four counts of a cost times when life expectancy was chilled would reap the benefits without paying the price in the future of we may have to choose the buffalo we can make an informed choice we need to discover the rules of the day i said at the beginning of this stake to the other two sites to the character of the n. a. its power and its vulnerability but assists the greeks storytellers knew full well that he didn't read into that any tale is beginning to play between the stray it's the weaknesses of its hero is clear that an important facet of the genetics of aging is the interaction between d. n. a. damage under genetic control of d. n. a. repair at nowhere is this most starkly illustrated than in the rare genetic disorder known as bernas syndrome when mutation in a gene that controls a pox on the d. n. a. repair machinery being stood up to the fold acceleration of many speeches of the aging process and addressed u. schulte ming of lifestyle this sales and a cousin with bennis syndrome showed abnormally heavy buttons up d. n. a. damage to the vulnerability of the genetic message unit will cost extends beyond immediate damage to the d. n. a. sequence in any event ever has seen how d. n. a. is copied him or pay the payroll will consider hiccups and random variations in how the genetic instructions are translated into proteins in how proteins are transported around the cells in hygiene skidded ten dollar adult in how cells and separate signals from other cells and so on the system looks because of evolutionary pressure as it should to be in stealing little is well enough contained the kids isn't into g. a. without vital functions during the old important idiots mrs. lomax and in our ancestral pasta the variations that do not affect us until middle and late in life are relatively unconstrained its lead in the deep ,comma we find that had genetic blueprint is not such a time in a state offered the role genes do not specified the band about alliance with any precision then shepherded us to woo some preordained goal like that guy and system of a cruise missile that meeting point of secession direction and do their best to keep his ticking along until michael gains the upper hand what'd tendons where we end up is a threefold named in a sharp net shot and shops in these heady days of rapid scientific and bounced it stops not true that our imaginations should grow wild with the new possibilities unfolding before us to dine at a dais with the brains of einstein the looks of bridget fonda's and the longevity of miscues and a double hundred realities of life have a habit of reasserting themselves weekend conceived in principle but chemotherapy that could double up human aging but as against we have a nice header but create a picture of the genes we would wish to change nor do we know it's changing the wood to mohan than goods we haven't even cracked a much simpler problem but to great effect given gene therapy to single gene disorder as like cystic fibrosis in the cases cystic fibrosis whitlow naim what we wanted to what do we could do to fill another approach that holds great promise to intervene in the aging process is to include all the regenerated intentional but the d. n. a. contained in ourselves stennis l. reception the subject of the conference can now look at cold spring harbor butler creek may enable us to replace those that have been damaged by the judge entered a process is that by and halt the aging but we must be careful not to raise false expectations update tableau was still rescinded to his having four kilos of parkinson's disease when transplanted fetal cells which had been shut to devote significant pitied promised was found to produce in excess says amounts of in your chemical did to me beating recipients in away state than the full the difficulties the stem cell reception line containing the power of d. n. a. and controlling its vulnerability to damage its too simplistic justice say that status cells contain the genetic blueprint to become a unique kind of specialized cells within the voting every ayerst themselves proceed through a complex series of developmental stages to pull the cells of the adults these stages in both sequin actual poulter rationed seen gene expression manipulated by interactions with neighboring cells if we want to put up any stem cells into a two to shoot we need to discover whether they can sufficiently weak capitulate the normal developmental process or in some key step might inadvertently been left out on the other hand if we use of adult stem cells we should recognize that the sales may be damaged by a huge in recent research on the stem cells of the lining of the dot by colleagues and i have shown that these cells up old took like aging in ways that significantly compromise that function probably because that d. n. a. is damaged president ends in promised to be in that an extra twenty five years of life in that time that it takes to try to select a groundbreaking new reception into effective application to set tough challenge for science nevertheless the president's production just might be running to science is on track to discover the deep secrets of aging for armies of insights will thus shorted the coming new strategies to attack the underlying goal was his of aids related diseases by counts on its osteoporosis and makinen degeneration is fifth week of a show of great is that quality of life in old age it may be that we can study in some extra years as well act on habitat you very much indeed extend d. n. a. choose these meat production and maintenance that cannot be changed any changes while mike consequences be antony case was to tying skin who love this might be in the landscape to be ninety nine will do you think that he intended to make not too long will the ins and asked a question he's an tense and him of michael contorted o'quinn worsen the talk about the instant the resistance will during the period that commissions are examples of big hits and the change in the course of the order .period disenfranchisement to guys in reactions set a strike at the d. n. a. sequence and they would damage the bases that contains sequence information these banned after being excited by the d. n. a. repair system and replaced with new intact bases but as i said these free radicals can damage or was it any component of the cell said is a very wide variety of kinds of molecular damage that produced in this way i was a wide variety of systems for recognizing these diverse kinds of damage or that its agreed to go up by university of oxford of cole's one of the fascinating things is that among them a specialized cells of all poultry is its young cells with autumnal holdup homes will function to ms. away each adding the predecessor of any union lamott speech old beating out their unions in must be earned reddish apathy in tolerating princess otherwise we'd stall sulfur a p. h. o. parents were of the time you can see he do we read anything about fashion is not and will host stews to the pulpit of his dealing with small gestures to tone yesterday the right of these cells are extremely special in may after halftime effectively the property of immortality that they've got to try to make jeans from generation to generation without aging without interior rating out there to possibilities one is that the germ cells that are being dealt with special repair systems they get a shot off packs that energy saving reasons in the rest of the cells of the bawdy and we're beginning to discover some examples of special repair systems that acting gems sales by the enzyme to lower rates that prevents the winter when the white of the team in this is one example in the other is that there are opportunities full selected to nation of gemstones that it just doesn't make the grade ,comma so we believe it's a combination of these two presence is one of stringent quality assurance to throw away the germ cells without compromise by damage last taps that take intrinsic repair systems within the germ cells themselves attention when it hit the road show from a mill will more normal mark questioned concerns among distilling goodall and own the juncture of a large sums to most reproduce themselves well spring storms during group will move the talks will move into the floor at times longer groom whose losses are rooted in social it's an interesting question addicts reedy appeals to an idea that was very popular among weak even to shriek thing because of the late nineteenth century was that we had is that where reproductive duty to the species and as soon as we have fulfilled our reproductive duty by producing the requisite number of children and we were rooted in the but in fact metro selection doesn't work quite like that because if you carried on reproducing phuong larue new produced a larger number of offspring they knew would leave extra gene copies of yourself in the next generation set re the selection is did towards maximizing the number of offspring mandate it doesn't have a say in it paid you prettiest enough and stop at a point with one startling exception ,comma but that is the medical was the cousin in human females but that's pretty much unique in that list of biology at the gentleman's punch lands to the committee is blighted the daylong getting off to the point to which we cease to be a bit too bbq sauce sells books appointed so they each will be the idea that we don't often get a reproduction doesn't apply in the vos majorities over ms. sims most organisms remain fat tiled until we insist that life spans the fraternity would decline with aging because aging takes its toll on other reproductive functions as it does on its systems but that there is generally not to mix to the reproductive capacity of the openness of seal streets again on the p. g. a. seasons nationality launched an christian pop it back and think you helen blouse from stanford university on a topic of oxygenated gannett's causing our gina damage it's been five to nine when he went to this hypothesis that he not humans we've involved so that we accumulate gehrig assets where is the other species that haverford lifespan have developed ways of eliminating or degrading gehrig asset your gas that causes as many problems when it accumulates kidney sounds gap set forth that it's thought that perhaps it acts as an antioxidant ,comma it protects against this d. n. a. damage what effect this hypothesis taut as the last thing you knew might just testing to bid for the nine on sunday some of its addictive and well up upon successful than i am aware of the hypotheses but i think the evidence is is a major play out and it needs additional human longevity is weak because the antioxidant properties of yuri kasey up pretty standout compared with the enormously and postal antioxidant enzymes that sales have been acting that the reason why humans if significantly longer than other species is that we just have our enzyme antioxidant offenses june's to a high level this is something that set awe will wish it would be my end of our trade by looking at a capacity of human cells to withstand oaxaca to stress is that if you grow cells in culture new for oxygen to agents like hydrogen peroxide witches with bleaching ahead is a major and kind of free radical would amass selves you see that human cells can shrug off an attack by hydrogen peroxide much that tapped into sells commercial time that species said other new recast it is possibly the lending possibly up costs of that story and i would suggest to the the jewelry is very much still out to my question you're familiar with the experiment centers sainz is busy parkway on the guests and taken us into the seat is having a problem to get to the technical but are being very happy to have continued discussion late into his seat on the vaccination may yet eileen rogers center courtyard ,comma but i understand he stayed in their lives no single gene parakeet and was effective -hyphen expressed that indicates a certain forms of diabetes cells and then removed and i innate and inserted into the new placed in a high elixir lacquer hodson and that was successful will there is a lot of research being done on a single gene defects in their lot with a big keating's of successes of the self :colon you mentioned is one of them also would beginning to see that you can use viruses to trounce the replacements genes to damaged genes into the toilet tissue for exult in the case of a child with cystic fibrosis you want to put the intact jean back into the linings of the lineup didn't mind who got the difficulty is that the success rates are reading offering good with these genes that resistance to that effect enough of the cells get to make a really big difference in what and when you do the debate at a combat alongside the effects may wear offset seventy we are moving in that direction but i think as any parent of a child with cystic fibrosis when ten new a great deal more needs to be done and done frosts hit sentiment in frankie seiki director of the ulcer versus decision fully fifty percent of our populations in the industrialized world to reach the age of eighty five which is the fastest growing segment of our population are demented or rapidly thereafter become demented with not always associated co morbidity so we know that it is a single gene that it is a very complex system what kinds of things really are we going to be able to do without having many magic bullets act think in the case of an alzheimer's disease is sadly true but the complexity of the process that leads to the disease does suggest that we will require a number of complementary approaches we beginning to see it on says we sole reason the publication of studies suggesting that you could immunize animals against the accumulation of the base around like pet type which is involved in the the development of this disease now we don't know yet when the server productions will work with in humans in the killing case of a condition like yeltsin this disease but far away the great talent is to be able to prove that acts that interior rationed because in the brain it said great challenge to think and sense of how we could kill a brain in which extensive damage has already cut my minnis oakland's opt out and ninety aidid's deed that particular night not not soup on the quality of life ,comma much alarmed when he not only law like bottles up quality left aidid's seventy put quality of life are higher up like this will rosette priority list than that extending quantity of life without regard to quality any was set to songs in this area is a waste trumpeted under the so iodine to scientists discover the secrets of the total use out i think that's pretty playing to an old fantasy that we've had a full hundreds of thousands of kids that somehow the aging process could be banished in some magic way i think it's his motives and realistic and secondly it's dangerous because it actually trivializes the challenge of improving the quality of the next three years of life the we've gained already passed produce foods or two to two and three shoot your concerns and carson's about use of bone cells through therapy and is sometimes a confusion between use of fetal tissue and stems cells heads to the confusion tragic it hoped the audience a bit like clarifying the case of the parkinson's patients that were transplanted to use of which are cells as opposed to stem cells is were discussing this meeting also that i think at this point that it is the theory that the deficits that once these nice visions are really a tribute to him increasing dole moved its one interpretation and their many interpretations review courses and think moving forward in our valuations that also interpretations are think festival in times of these recent date for its bidding days and we need to understand what eighties but has apparently gone wrong that challenge that i was pretty alluding to inspect we needs a lot of four sets to tell us if we take cells from babson biddy developmental stage we trust that he sells it for me to bryant whether league environment not that you're right contains enough information to tell us sells hot honey will wear that this sells half to let 'em because fruit this sequence of switching on and switching off of gene functions are considered a bit like some of the films that suggests that the child could be transferred into an adult body and apple capability of the adult body did not have left the growing up process that makes it a fully functional adult said we didn't know who it says is a new stock split this tremendous directed progress of these other kinds of questions being addressed to the conference hippies with cartons of questions to the field is really got to grapple with an onset of full weekend of exactly what is very exciting new marriott of silence will be able to deduct up that you mentioned in your neck to toe that she had done some new york only to come some essential selves into adult cells of close to the question is whether this adult cells pakistanis to act in full permission to that's right will we do is to look at the stem cells of the dot pools and to see whether the cells changed with aging and what we found was the guest who are actually quite simple and functional changes that occurred in the cells with aging and that suggests that the d. n. a. in the cells in spite of the excellent maintenance and repair systems that send tells how to begin a in the cells may be damaged a compromised in some way richer run amok great act of the status so that europe concerning an older people who die in the same d. n. a. is the older people are the come from different individuals that the zelda people's unknown d. n. a. ,comma moreover rattles and d. n. a. studies at the center sells that had been formed as part of a normal developmental process but they are accustomed to reiteration with ainge if cloning would work if you could call it an individual and then have an individual's younger selves would help them to transfer those younger cells into an older than the one that that's a really good question and it's a question we intend yet have the data to give up once a push hooked it seems that when you clone an animal that sets in the case of dolly the sheep you get an animal that's stocks would be to paint should respect is here to say you take a cell -hyphen adults that has a set number of music he makes it you put it back into an eight actives rise to an embryo and eventually to bob and animal not i think it's highly significant if you don't have the backgrounds of the creation of dolly the sheep that up very large number of these transfers systematic sell new t. i. were attempted but state failed to serve this suggests that out of the cells that you could attempts to use full planning a lot of them will be damaged some of them may be good and don't receive the peak came from a good nucleus but there's a lot of data now accumulating from these planning studies that the embryos that result from plumbing have a very high for a direct during development will win the honor was blown inmate died quite quickly asked that left such visas consistent with the idea that eleven nucleus is good enough to support that the seven stages of development is is to sell its banana bawdy and subjected to what these kids during the years that it's been in the body that may not be in perfect condition so that i think we need to let the stacked the vulnerability of the d. n. a. that follows the basics of cloning before we know where the cells that could be produced through this procedure would actually be good enough to read the unison with the magic we would like to whip says can be sometimes and if we could have your intestinal pinning the pang case has intensified late coming to the end of time not just a couple questions one into him robert alvin within him parma to protection agency by purists that users least information i heard that the e. in the cloned sheep was speaking at a rate faster than a newborn she would be and also there's a human disease which seems to accelerate the teaching process are dear to any cases where the crop is in use of a search whether in humans or in animals were something doesn't seem to be aging isn't anywhere near that the normal rates of as the will of their robes of nations from studies on a fruit flies and round wellness where mutations have been discovered but extend lifespan and slow the rate of aging out we haven't seen this kind of mutations being founded mammals in my soul in humans in the case of dolly the sheep if united dolly's teal amidst bestial set then you would expect for sheep about ancient everyone is waiting with great interest to see how long she will live as fabulous as stanford university and was elected a new opinion the successes we have a cheap and we are lacking to weave in expecting the next few years in an expanding deemed to be his last time that how we invading backed bill would upgrade the human race that would boost in the next hot said in a dozen years of about five seconds into the woods in the the showed thomas recently got a bit last between chad and construct some educated guesses i think a lot is changing some people say a new division assaults in the human race that will be asleep no true evolution is a long day impresses metro's mentions in one day impresses putting what directions goading we need to do some careful pinky than finding out nineteen and a nice week not only the sixth and deathbed found zinc tome had put them on cuba to lean on six to one knee to end the way we teach that to date will be in scotland to indicating that at the international festival of science know they can hit and move out we had fun not installed his yet coasting home in long island ninety to july reached entrant fassett tonk head for its acts could you be listening to uphold cost from leo collies of the b. b. c. greek like chairs for more put car keys visits bt seed dole coups de acute case /slash we do for 