REITH LECTURES 2004: Climate of Fear
Wole Soyinka
Lecture 5: I am Right; You are Dead
TRANSMISSION: 5 May 2004 – Radio 4

The French nation was lately involved in a controversy over its decision to ban
ostentatious symbols of religious faiths from secondary schools. I was invited to take
part in that debate, and readily accepted. It was a chance to openly interrogate a longheld conviction that there should be a period in the development of the young mind
when the perception of differences in humanity is reduced to an absolute minimum,
even if it cannot be eliminated completely. That period, it seems obvious, is that of
school pupilage, where the space of instruction is cleansed of manifestations of
private wealth, tastes, class etc. The symbol, as well as practical expression of this
oneness, the leveller, is of course the school uniform.
Objections surfaced to the mind - the indelicate, even provocative timing - indelicate
to the extent of almost sounding like a declaration of hostilities! Then the positive role
of such symbols as spiritual and ethical reminders in the consciousness of youthful
minds at all times, a corrective mechanism when on the verge of misconduct. In short,
my mind was readying itself for the mode of dialogue, anticipating even the extension
into as protest demonstrations. Capitulation by the government was already a
possibility. I anticipated a protracted dialogue, involving the basic philosophy of
education, going back to ancient times, inductions into age groups in traditional
societies etc etc.
For some alas, such dialogue was superfluous. A hitherto unknown group, vying to
overtake others as the Terminal Censors of our time, warned the French government
that it was next in line for a Madrid-style reprisal and should prepare for a season of
'sorrow and remorse' for her perceived assault on the Islamic faith. So now, perhaps it
is only a matter of time before some public target, perhaps even a school is bombed in
an effort to end the dialogue, the contested head scarves torn off to serve as tourniquet
for severed limbs or even - shrouds.

Crusade of Vengeance
Here is an even more ancient terminating venture - the ironically named 'Right to Life'
crusaders in the United States, known plainly as anti-abortion militants. One such
group - self-styled the 'Army of God' boasts a supportive network for its assassins,
one that extend to Europe. They gun down doctors, police guards, and the occasional
patients or passers-by. The network provided protection for the one who named
himself "Sword of God" while on the run for murders. Another of the same breed of
Christian fundamentalist, an ordained priest, was executed in Texas last year, to a
chorus of threats by his support group that they would unleash on the American nation
reprisals that would make Timothy McVeigh's crusade of vengeance look like child's
play. Timothy MacVeigh, for the uninitiated, was that remarkable zealot who was
plagued by a unique social conscience that could only be stilled by blowing up a

1

public building, one that housed both a state security department as well as an infant
school. McVeigh did not profess any religion. Nonetheless he was a zealot of his own
Supreme Purpose, the manifestation of a private irredentism. His chosen grounds of
dispute were neither ideological nor theological, but he presents us with a clear
psychopathology of the zealot, one who is imbued with a self-righteousness that can
only be assuaged by homicidal resolution. It moves all possible discourse away from
even the dogmatic, dead-end monologue of I am right, you are wrong to that of I am
right; you are dead.
The issue therefore, as I remarked in my last lecture, is not Religion but fanaticism.
This however does not absolve either Ideology or Religion of responsibility for the
fanatic strain to which it gives birth, one that Religion even occasionally unleashes in
the contest for political supremacy, then repudiates - too late. It is time for us to
recognize that there is no regulating mechanism for the fanatic mind, once set in
motion. Not for nothing do the Yoruba warn that: sooner than have a monster child
meet a shameful death in the market place, it is best that the mother strangle it in the
secret recesses of the home. What this means, quite simply, is that the primary burden
of exorcising the demon that escaped from the womb, rests on the same womb that
gave it birth. Today there is urgent need for mother religion of whatever inclination to
come to the rescue of humanity with a creative act of infanticide.
It was not theocratic dictatorship, but repressions of a secular order that evoked my
sense of unease when, a full generation ago, I delivered a lecture of the title Climates
of Art, to which I made reference at the introduction of these series. There is however
a link, unsought, a sense of brutal continuity. That link was the attempted murder of
the Egyptian writer Naguib Mahfouz, a Nobel Prize winner by the way, but what
matters to us is that he was - still is - a writer of his time and most relevantly, place.
Unlike a number of other creative minds trapped within the killing domain of
religious terminal censors, Mahfouz did survive, a living symbol of that space of
creative martyrdom that stretches today from Afghanistan of the Talibans through
Iran, to North Africa, Algeria most especially. That space of fanaticism aggressively
expands into other nations of traditional tolerance and balance, including mine,
Nigeria.

The Plunging Knife
My poem Samarkand was a tribute to Naguib Mafouz, who was fated to expand into
the religious those apprehensions of the secular to which I had given voice in
Climates of Art, delivered some twenty five years ago:
….. the ink of Kandahar
Has turned to blood. The heir of ancient dynasties
Of letters - Khorassan, Alexandria, Timbuktoo lies sprawled
In the dirt and dust of a passageway
He is no alien. No roots than his grow deeper
In that market place, no eye roved closer home.
He is that fixture in the marketplace café
Sipping sweetened cups of mint, oblivious of
The bitter one that would be served

2

By the shadowy one, the waiter-stalker, a youth
Fed on dreams of sarabands of houris
Doe-eyed virgins, wine and sweetmeats in the afterlife
But to his paradise, a key - the plunging knife.

The nineteenth century black American scholar, W.E.B. Dubois once declared that the
issue of the twentieth century would be that of race. It is becoming clear that while
that century may have indeed inherited and been plagued near continuously by that
social issue, it was replaced towards the end by that of religion, and it is one that has
not yet been addressed with the same global concern as race once was. Perhaps the
Katami-UNESCO initiative to which I referred in an earlier lecture, a series of
contacts titled Dialougue of Civilisations will succeed in bringing the world to
confront this lethal successor to the secular monologue. Pol Pot is dead, gone the way
of those other architects of the necropolis - Adolf Hitler, Josef Stalin and other mixed
company of both Left and Right. Today, the main source of fanatic mind is - religion,
and its temper, one that, ironically, is grounded in the doctrine of submission, has
grown increasingly arrogant, doctrinaire and violent, almost in an unconscious
vengeful recompense for its apprenticeship within the spiritual principle of
Submission.
At stake is tolerance, and the place of dissent within a social order. There are,
however, differences between the workings of secular intolerance and those of the
theocratic and such differences may assist us in assessing the very real threat to
human freedom that the closed world of the fanatic poses to humanity. Secular
ideology derives its theories from history and the material world. The mind has
therefore learnt to pause occasionally and reflect on the process that links the material
world to the doctrines that derive from or govern it, to test theories against those
realities, be they economic, industrial or even environmental. The dynamic totality of
the real world is given rational space. Even the craving after infallibility - as in the
case of Marxism -may result in the exposure of fallacies and inconsistencies, or at the
least, ambiguous zones within the theory.
Thus, within a secular dispensation, even under the most rigid totalitarian order, its
underpinning ideology - that is, is equivalent of theology - remains open to
contestation. Open questioning may be suppressed, open debate may be restricted or
prohibited by the state or the Party of power, but the functioning of the mind, its
capacity for critique - even self-criticism - never ceases. The mind remains a free
agent within its own space, free to roam outside the confines of the totalitarian order,
to seek, and often find kindred spirits and form a conspiracy of non-believers or at
least, sceptics. This factor leads sooner or later to an alternative view, and perhaps
piecemeal erosion of the doctrinaire system. Under the theocratic sibling however,
one that derives its authority, not from theories that are elicited from the material
conditions of society but from the secret spaces of Revelation, this disposition of the
mind towards alternative concepts is next to impossible. Curiosity succumbs to fear,
often masquerading as pious Submission. The theocratic order derives its mandate
from the unknown. Only a chosen few are privileged to have penetrated the workings
of the mind of the Unknown, whose constitution - known as the Scriptures - they and
they alone can interpret. The fanatic that is born of this dogmatic structure of the
ineffable religion is the most dangerous being on earth.

3

Homicidal hubris is the ultimate hallmark of the fanatic. The ice pick in the neck of
Leon Trotsky, ensconced in the deceptive safety of Mexico, was forged in the same
furnace as the knife that sought the throat of Naguib Mafouz.

Act of Impiety
We are sometimes able to observe the intrusion of political opportunism into the
workings of religious zealotry, a common enough marriage of convenience that gives
birth to monstrosities. Let us only recall the sustained mob arousal in India that ended
with Hindus razing down an ancient mosque in the state of Utter Pradesh, on the
grounds that this centuries-old mosque had been built on the very spot where Lord
Rama, a Hindu deity, first made his appearance on earth. The reverberations of that
act of impiety have continued to haunt the Indian nation till today, but the immediate
repercussions were orgies of killings, including the ambush of railway trains and
commuter buses, the virtual 'religious cleansing' of neighbourhoods, creating ghost
villages and derelict urban centres.
And here, let us pause, and use this episode to anticipate and silence those who,
whenever an outrage linked to one religion or the other attracts amply deserved
condemnation, immediately sound alarms of prejudice, sectarian hatred and world
conspiracies, tacitly claiming for such structures of faith an immunity from
commentar. The world, East and West, including its official organs - UNO and
UNESCO - were unambiguous in their condemnation of that crime, even as they
would later unite in condemnation of the iconoclasm of the Taliban against the
historic statues of Buddha. That former rebuke did not lead to any claims by Hindus
that the world nursed a primordial hatred against Hinduism or had entered into a
conspiracy to eradicate that religion from the world. On a personal level, I found
myself sufficiently exercised to note the event in my poetic menu of Twelve Canticles
for the Zealot, published in 'Samarkand and Other Markets I have known':
A god is nowhere born, yet everywhere
But Rama's sect rejects that fine distinction The designated spot is sanctified, not for piety but
For dissolution of yours from mine, politics of hate
And forced exchange - peace for a moment's rapture.
They turn a mosque to rubble, stone by stone,
Condemned usurper of Lord Rama's vanished spot
Of dreamt epiphany. Now a cairn of stones
Usurps a dream of peace - can they dream peace
In iconoclast Utter Pradesh?
Few spots in the world today are exempt from the depredations of the fanatic. I
believe it should be possible to view the bombing of innocents in the United States,
Bali, Casablanca, Madrid or anywhere else in the same way. It is untenable to claim
that, because those mass-killers implicated, and persist in inovking the banner of
Islam, seeking legitimation and a killing rapture from that religion, that Islam is
therefore under indictment. Equally is it unacceptable to claim that any condemnation
of the act or pursuit of the criminals reveals hatred of the religion. A world in which a
powerful organisation like NATO goes to battle against the christian Serbs on behalf
of a battered moslem population, and brings the head of their violators to justice

4

before an International Tribunal, is not a world that is prejudiced against Islam,
Christendom or Buddhism and the propagators of such doctrines are merely
disingenuous.

Cesspool of Fanaticism
In any case, the Christian world is not one, neither is the Islamic, nor do their
combined authority speak to or for the entire world, but the world of the fanatic is one
and it cuts across all religions and vocations. The tributaries that feed the cesspool of
fanaticism may ooze from sources separated by history, clime and race, by injustices
and numerous privations, but they arrive at the same destination - the zone of
unquestioning certitude. The zealot is one that creates a Supreme Being, or Purpose in
his or her own image, then executes out the orders of that solipsistic device that
commands from within, in lofty alienation from, and utter contempt of society and
community.
We, on the African continent, whose people were decimated, in a time of our own
troubled peace, in Kenya and Tanzania, our soil violated by one of the earliest aerial
sabotage that scattered human limbs over the earth of Niger, have a special stake in
this. The black freedom fighters of Southern Sudan, locked in a brutal war of over
three decades against an Islamic regime, a genocidal war that has claimed at least a
hundred thousand times more lives and overseen a thousand times greater destruction
of a people, an environment and a culture than in the Middle East, have not resorted to
accusing the Islamic or Arab world of a conspiracy against the black race. They are
focused on their quest for liberation from a specified, localised theocratic and often
racist order, against which they have raised charges of genocide that remain largely
ignored by the Western world and by the United Nations. We do not hear from the
leaders of that struggle any proposition of the division of the world into the African
world against All Others. They have not moved to set the bazaars and monuments of
Medina on fire or burn Japanese infants in their cribs. Not even the historic - still
ongoing in parts - denigration of African religions and cultures, or indeed the memory
of both European and Arab enslavement of the African peoples, has elicited this
inflammatory agenda.
African religions do not proselytize but, let me break that tradition, in the cause of the
global quest for harmonized co-existence, and offer the world a lesson from African
spirituality, taken specifically from the world of the orisa, the pantheon of the Yoruba
people. This religion, one that is still pursued in Brazil and other parts of Southern
America and the Caribbean, has never engaged on any equivalent of the crusade or
the jihad in its own cause. The word 'infidel' or unbeliever is anathema to its
Scriptures, thus it cannot recognize a spiritual dichotomy of the world. Despite its
reticence however, it has penetrated the globe and survived through confident
retention by the displaced and dispossessed slaves and its infectious hold even on
their European violators. Its watchword is - tolerance, a belief that there are many
paths to truth and godhead and that the world need not be set on fire to prove the
supremacy of a belief or the righteousness of a cause.

5

Them and Us
The dead-end dogmatism of I am right, you are wrong, has circled back since the
contest of ideologies and once again attained its apotheosis of I am right; you are
dead. The monologue of unilateralism constantly aspires to the mantle of The Chosen
and of course, further dichotomises the world, inviting us, on pain of consequences, to
choose between 'them' and 'us'. We must, in other words, reject the pronouncements
of a George Bush in the ultimatum: 'you are either with us and against the terrorists,
or you are on the side of the terrorists', just as strongly as we repudiate Osama bin
Laden's 'The world is now clearly divided into two - the world of the followers of
Islam against that of infidels and unbelievers'.
Could the United States have responded differently immediately after Sept. 11?
Perhaps not. Hindsight is a most unreliable judge of such decisions, and those
circumstances were clearly unprecedented. Did that nation however have to embark
on that avoidable path that led remorselessly into Iraq? More specifically, and with no
complication of hindsight: why were the Weapons inspectors of the United Nations
ordered out of Iraq in submission to the will of one nation especially at a moment
when Saddam Hussein had openly submitted himself to the authority of that very
institution?
Let us turn to our present dateline. It is still the second millennium, the so-called era
of the 'global village'. Concretely, it is the era in which the world has attempted to put
in place, after many blunders and dereliction of responsibilities, International Courts
and Tribunals for Crimes against Humanity. It is an era in which former Heads of
State are being hauled up for crimes against their own peoples and against others from Chile to Rwanda. It is the era of the strategy of near globally upheld sanctions,
not always successful, we know, and sometimes excruciating slow in the ability to
produce the desired results. It is nevertheless the era of newly reinvigorated
possibilities, a new global relevance for the organ called the United Nations. Indeed,
perhaps it was stemming from this same consciousness, an attempt to impress upon
the world the critical necessity of such an organ in the New Millennium, that the
Nobel establishment in its centennial anniversary chose to honour that organisation,
and its Secretary-General, with the Peace prize. We cannot deny or gloss over some of
its failures to live up to the world's expectations, to its founding ideas, and the needs
of humanity. We are only too keenly aware of the costly consequences - in global
trust, and in human lives - of some of those failures. Nevertheless, we are doomed to
despair if we failed also to acknowledge its many achievements, and to accept the fact
that it is the only organ in the world that has unquestioned authority of intervention in
troubled spots.
Unilateral action, or the appropriation of a global duty of response, by any one nation,
serves only to diminish the United Nations. That the greatest culprit in this respect
should be one of such powerful achievements as the United States, one that is also
host to that organisation, physically, on its own soil, only denotes an enervation of
global vision. That the United States has the capacity for technological, military and
economic leadership is not in dispute; what the United States lacks is philosophical
leadership, despite its formidable reserves of original thinkers. The atrocity of Sept.
11 was a crime against the world, against humanity. It was thus a moment for the
United States to have demonstrated her readiness to reinforce the structures that take a
global view of such criminality. The US had the option of placing her formidable

6

capabilities under the moral authority of the United Nations, instilling in her own
people the imperatives of a global approach to justice.

Quagmire of Iraq
AMERICAN STRIKES BACK! - No, this resort to what we identified in an earlier
talk as rhetorical hysteria was not what the world needed to see emblazoning the
screens of American television hour after hour, day after day and week after week as
the United States gathered its strength to avenge a crime that was committed on its
soil. Such orchestration of mood was bound to lead, sooner or later to the quagmire of
Iraq, lose its ethical moorings in the original cause, and degenerate into an openended career of aggressive pursuit that would translate as AMERICA STRIKES ON AND ON AND… ON… AND ON…its lethal array of weaponry poised to awe and
shock!
If certain acts against humanity appear to place their perpetrators beyond dialogue, we
must still embrace interrogation - that is, self-interrogation. In what way, in turn, have
we contributed to the making of such a moment? Failure to do this limits the longterm effectiveness of response, and brackets us with the mentality of the fanatic who,
literally, never seeks to recover, indeed is incapable of recovering a long receded
moment of doubt, the zone of possible choices, of the potentials of the routes not
taken. That quest is open and universal. What nature of an environment ensured the
stabbing of a Naguib Mafouz? Has Marxism triumphed since the killing of Leon
Trostky? Was peaceful co-existence promoted by the demolition of the mosque in
Utter Pradesh? Has the assassination of Sheikh Yassin made the world any safer.
What kind of morality is it that turns a 14-year-old child into a walking bomb. Does a
supposed wall of defence concretize hope or despair across the Middle East? Why did
the woman writer, Taslim Nazreen, become a fugitive from her home in Pakistan?
Our theme is fanaticism - so let the last word be on behalf of that doubly endangered
specie, writer and woman, standing in for the disdained of the world, seeking equality
for their kind:
Some words are coarse, obscene, indecent.
They make a case for censorship, such words as
Pagan, heathen, infidel, unbeliever, kafiri etc.
The cleric swears he'll sweep the streets clean
Of the unclean, armed with Book and Beard. Both
Turn kindling, but overturn the law of physics.
For the fire consumes all but the arsonist. He lives
To preach another day. The promised beast
Of the Apocalypse left me unbeliever
Till a rambling cleric apportioned death on CNN Surely that devil's instrument! - on Taslim Nazreen
She wrote of an equalising God, androgynous
Who deals, ambidextrous, with the Left and Right.

7

