Lord Broers
Reith Lectures 2005: The Triumph of the Technology
Lecture 3: Innovation and Management
When Ralph Waldo Emerson reputedly and memorably said that the world would beat
a path to the door of a person who made a better mousetrap, he was perhaps being
unduly optimistic, but at least he realised that the mousetrap had to be made and that
it would not be sufficient merely to have an idea, or even a patent, for a better mouse
trap. Ideas have to be proven to be useful, and the world told about them, before any
paths are beaten. Profound changes have taken place in the development of ideas and
their translation in to the market place and in my third Reith lecture I argue that this
innovation revolution demands a new approach to research and product development.
To illustrate this story I go back to the beginning of my research career. I was drawn
to Britain from the sunshine of Australia in 1959 because Britain led the world in
making the best domestic electronics, especially the high fidelity sound systems that
had fascinated me since I was a boy. I had formed a little company in Melbourne today we would call it a start-up - that made hi fi systems for rich farmers, and all the
equipment that we used was British, including the electronic components, so my
ambition was to come to England and work on their further development.
But by the time I had finished my PhD in 1965 the excitement in electronics had
moved to transistors and the newly emerging integrated circuits, and my PhD research
had taken me strongly in this direction. Some of the important concepts for integrated
circuits had emerged in Britain, in particular at the Royal Signals and Radar
Establishment in Malvern, but the most exciting research was being pursued in the
laboratories of the large American technology companies. There was a great demand
for PhD graduates in electronics and related fields and the 'brain drain' from the UK to
the USA was at full flow. There was no doubt in anybody's mind at that time that the
ideal model for technology development was the large, well funded, industrial
research laboratory staffed with talented PhD graduates from the world's leading
universities. Fundamental research could go on in universities but it was only in the
large industrial or government funded research laboratories that the really important
practical advances were made. If I wanted to work on the creation of new
technologies - on the evolution of the better mousetrap - then I would have to go to
such a laboratory. This was not only the case in computers and communication but in
the transport, chemical and pharmaceutical industries also.
The most famous of the industrial research laboratories was the great A T & T Bell
Telephone Laboratory that had dominated the world of communications for decades,
but there were many other fine laboratories. General Electric, Hewlett Packard,
Hughes Aircraft, Westinghouse, General Motors and so on, all maintained large
research facilities and relied on them to provide the ideas and technologies for their
new products. I chose the new IBM Research Laboratory because IBM led in
computer technology and they were running some projects where I could apply my
PhD research directly. And besides the IBM laboratory was housed in a magnificent
new Eero Saarinen building surrounded by 70 acres of beautiful grounds in the
country 50 minutes north of New York City and everyone was talking about it. As I

have said this was the era when the industrial research laboratories dominated the
world of innovation.
But that was forty years ago and much has changed since then, and it is the way things
have changed that I discuss this evening. The domination of the large industrial
research laboratory has largely come to an end, and in all fields except perhaps
pharmaceuticals, those that remain no longer operate in the same manner. They have
become far more focussed on product development. It is the way this has happened,
and what has replaced these large institutions which once seemed so dominant and
impregnable, that interests me.
Industrial research laboratories were, and are, extraordinarily expensive, and to an
extent, speculative. The payback is the new products that they enable. Their task is to
take advances in science, or novel uses and combinations of existing technologies,
and demonstrate that they can be used to produce useful commercial products. In the
larger companies the research laboratories were not required to produce finished
products - that was left to 'development' laboratories - their task was to demonstrate
that it was in principle possible to make the product. But they did much more than
this. They were also charged with carrying out fundamental research to underpin the
activities of the parent company. They provided the reservoir from which most, if not
all, of the fundamental advances from which products were to be developed, would be
drawn.
By no means all innovative research carried out in industrial laboratories succeeded
commercially - who has now heard of Remington-Rand computers. Neither was
everything taken up by the parent company - the ubiquitous icons that we see on
personal computer screens were first proposed by workers in Xerox' research
laboratory and yet Xerox never made computers in large volumes. But up until the
1980s it was the industrial research laboratories that acted as the well-springs from
which most successful new products were drawn. In addition to providing the
scientific underpinning to a range of products, researchers were rewarded for making
contributions to fundamental science, even if it was unrelated to the company's
business. I remember scientists in the IBM Research laboratory working on gravity
waves, the formation of galaxies, and fractals, subjects of importance to science, but
that bore little relation to IBM's products. Achievements in science were considered
as important as solutions that enabled new products to be successful.
In retrospect it becomes obvious that this support of fundamental science was in effect
a philanthropic activity and could be afforded because the companies that practiced it
on a significant scale were in fact monopolies. Some thought that they owed it to
society. This has now changed. Very little fundamental research remains in corporate
research laboratories.
The world has become more competitive and there are now few, if any, companies in
any country that exercise an effective monopoly. The world of technology and science
has also expanded so much that it is no longer possible, even for the largest
companies, to sustain a research effort that can cover all the disciplines used in their
products. Finally, leading research is going on all over the world and it is less and less
likely that the important new ideas will emerge in a company's own laboratory. It is
better to put in place mechanisms that draw on the global research output, which

incidentally is no longer confined to Europe, Japan and North America but is
emerging rapidly in the East. The aim must be to draw upon the entire world of
science and technology.
So given this transformation, where is it best to pursue basic research and how should
companies manage and organize the creation of new products? It is relatively easy to
answer the first of these questions. Fundamental research is best carried out in
universities. Universities allow researchers to set long-range goals - they are free to
further humankind's understanding of the universe. It also makes them good at the
type of research that used to be the domain of the industrial research laboratory. They
have critical mass through the support of governments and can sustain breadth across
the disciplines including the social sciences, and in some cases also the arts and
humanities. Successful academics are active participants in the international
community and are in a position to discuss their work without constraint with their
peers around the world. They live in an environment that is continually refreshed by
the intake of new students, and provided the faculty are motivated to remain active in
areas of current interest, they remain agile and creative. It is the scope and variety of
interdisciplinarity and the constant renewal brought by new, young minds, which
underpin the achievements of university research. Government funded research
laboratories are also in a good position to sustain strong fundamental research,
although they are more likely to lose creativity as their membership ages.
The principal challenge for any research organization, when their aim is to pursue
research which underpins technology, is to find ways to transfer their ideas into
practical advances - in other words to be effective in technology transfer. This is
especially the case for universities. Universities have made significant advances in
recent years through the setting up of what are called 'incubators' and by supporting
work that takes ideas to the point of initial feasibility. They have shown that they can
be effective in providing the input to the product development process, especially
when new scientific concepts are involved.
When it comes to product development, however, academics have difficulty in being
sufficiently single-minded. They have to teach and examine, and tend nowadays to be
evaluated on their output of original research. The product development process, on
the other hand, requires focused dedication to product aims. Important scientific
advances are made along the path to the product but these usually become valuable
intellectual property and their creators will not be motivated, nor even allowed, to
publish them. Academics who have been involved in the research phase of technology
development, however, make valuable consultants and their involvement in the
product development process is hugely beneficial.
The creation of new products is therefore only effectively carried out by dedicated
teams who can devote one hundred percent of their time to the activity. To be
successful the innovators will almost certainly need an intimate knowledge of the
science that underlies the technology, but their aim will not be to further the science.
They will use their knowledge to break down the barriers that stand in the way of
practical application. The resources needed to innovate are typically greater than those
needed in research: As Thomas Edison famously said, the process is 'one per cent
inspiration and ninety-nine per cent perspiration', and the energy and effort called for
to take the idea of our better mousetrap successfully through to the sales floor is

immense. This is partly because the process becomes a race against competitors, and
the team must be large enough to get to their goal in time; and partly because there is
an over-riding need to demonstrate that there are means reliably to manufacture the
product in high volumes.
Although there will be different ways to organize the creation of products in different
industries some general needs can be identified. Innovation today is global so
innovators must be familiar with what is going on all over the world - they should be
members of the international community in their subject, or at least be in close contact
with those who are, such as leading academics. For large companies with adequate
resources this can be accomplished through collaborative research programmes with
universities. In such programmes the goals of the research should be jointly set by the
academics and industrialists so that everyone is familiar with the needs of the product
or process programmes as well as with the research agenda. Such joint projects are
also effective in transferring technology that has had its origins in universities. It is
not effective for industry merely to 'contract out' their research needs to universities.
In small and medium sized companies, where the resources are not great enough to
fund large-scale research in universities, technology is best transferred by the
academics moving out of their universities and devoting their full energies to the
product development process. Many venture capitalists require this before they will
fund a start-up. If they are not prepared to devote full time to the project themselves
they will have to find others who will, and then act as advisors. This is not the best
way to do things but it is a common model.
It is also important to realize that the original ideas of the founding entrepreneurs
usually only form the core of the what will be required. The rest of the creative input
will have to come from all over the world. It is therefore important for small
companies to be in touch with all sources of expertise; with universities, large
companies, government funded establishments etc.... feeding off their ideas and using
the larger organisations' resources to lever their own activities. In recent years in
Britain it has been the small companies that have worked alongside large companies
in a complementary way, such as ARM whose microprocessors power more than
three quarters of the world's mobile phones, that have succeeded. Competing with the
technological giants head-on normally ends in failure, or in selling out at their terms
as the giants turn their blow-torch on the small company's niche.
To understand the degree to which product development has changed and become
global, one only has to examine the aerospace, mobile telephone or automobile
industries. The components that make up these systems are no longer made by single
companies. Technologies are brought together from around the world and integrated
in to the final product. The indispensable modern cellular telephone drew on
technology developed in Finland, Sweden, Japan, and the United States, and many of
the most advanced phones are designed in the UK. The components of a modern
airliner like the Airbus 380 have been drawn from hundreds of locations in Europe,
the USA and the Far East as are the components of modern cars. The innovation is
distributed and international and perhaps the most powerful minds of all are those at
the centre who have to decide which technologies to select and how they will be
brought together. The situation is similar in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries and in the building of large computer software systems.

In cases where the product is to be mass-produced, as with most consumer products,
the development of a commercially competitive manufacturing process is similarly
global and takes even greater resources And again there is an interface, this time
between development and manufacturing, where collaboration and the transfer of
people is once more the key to success. As already mentioned, the resource needed to
develop the manufacturing process can be ten times greater than that in development,
or one hundred times that in research.
Throughout all of what I have been talking about, the handling of intellectual property
is key. The intellectual property must be sound and the ownership of patents clear and
capable of withstanding challenge. Multiple ownership makes patents difficult to
manage internationally and should, if possible, be avoided. Professionalism is
essential. This is not the territory of the gifted amateur, even if many still cling to this
romantic idea. Losing one's own and everyone else's money through unprofessional
protection of intellectual property is not romantic.
Leadership in the creation of new technology, is of prime importance and nobody will
be surprised to hear that there are tensions between the ambitions of the creative
engineer, the demands of the market, and the availability of resources. This is one
area where the vast increase in the technology base and the spreading of this base
around the globe has not changed things. I believe that technology based businesses
should always be led by those who understand and have most experience of the
market. Creative technologists provide the ideas for the new products and the
expertise for manufacturing them, and may of necessity have to carry a new company
through its early stages, but only the exceptional amongst them are able to develop a
realistic view of the market for their ideas. In a small company, the ideal leadership
team consists of a chief executive who has extensive experience of the market and
good business sense, the creative engineer who stands at the chief executive's right
hand and provides knowledge and contacts that spread throughout the entire technical
spectrum, and the chief financial officer who acts as the disciplinarian. In large
companies the team should retain the same characteristics and hierarchy although the
capabilities will be distributed over the layers of the organisation. What has changed
over the last few years is that everyone now has to have an international perspective,
and preferably international working experience.
The world of product and process creation has become wholly international. To be
only nationally competitive is to be not competitive. The pace has also accelerated to
the extent that those who do not thrive in a stressful environment had better find
something else to do. In the oft quoted words of Andy Grove, the past head of Intel "Only the paranoid survive". This is a fast moving and ultra-competitive world. In the
last decade of the 20th century we lived through what was in effect a new industrial
revolution. Companies ceased to make entire products themselves and became
assemblers of the world's best, and to do this they had to know the world - both its
technologies and its peoples. And these trends are only going to accelerate as the
emerging powers of India and China enter the world of innovation as powerfully as
they entered high technology manufacturing. It is immensely exhilarating to be a
player but there are no places reserved for amateurs.

