Lord Broers
Reith Lectures 2005: The Triumph of the Technology
Lecture 2: Collaboration
When I returned to this Engineering Department from the USA in 1984 my wife and I
bought an historic and wonderful house some ten miles south of Cambridge. It was
built around 1520, a date that could be substantiated to within a decade by the form of
the oak beams that comprised its floors and ceilings. These had been shaped by iron
blades that only lasted about ten years. Being someone of the present rather than the
past I had not previously been much preoccupied with history but living in the
splendid oak structure - like a fine sailing vessel that had gone aground - inspired me
to wonder what had preoccupied the technologists and scientists of that age.
In my search I discovered that on 24 August 1563 a 'conjunction' took place of the
planets Saturn and Jupiter. The two appeared so close together in the sky that they
seemed to merge together. This rare occurrence was of great importance in an era
when it was widely believed that exceptional astronomical events both influenced and
predicted worldly happenings.
The problem was that the very best minds of the period, in Europe at least, were quite
unable to calculate exactly when the conjunction was to take place. Some calculations
were at least a month out. The best were inaccurate by days. Given the science and
technology of the period, such inaccuracy is easy to understand. There were no
reliable and accurate clocks. And without astronomical telescopes, robust celestial
observation was to a great extent impossible. And besides, how many of us could do
this calculation today?
The importance of overcoming such problems was not just a matter of shoring up the
credibility of astrologers. Upon fine and accurate astronomical observation, and upon
accurate timekeeping, depended reliable navigation, and the possibility of fruitful
voyaging in the coming centuries. Measurement, the development of observational
instruments and accurate clocks, complex calculations: all these came together in the
ensuing centuries. Technology was of importance and gained support and the process
by which these advances was achieved perfectly illustrates the productive connection
between science and technology. The latest manifestations of this are the Global
Positioning System, which I shall describe later, and its European descendant Galileo.
We think of such support as a modern phenomenon, but in fact - in Europe at least governments have supported scientific and technological research for centuries. Such
support was commonly tied to the fulfilment of contemporary needs, for example in
the development of accurate systems of navigation to overcome the shortcomings we
have just glimpsed.
Most modern technologies are created by bringing together and evolving capabilities
which already exist. The genius lies in the way they are brought together and
improved. There are innumerable examples to illustrate the process. The long sought
mobile phone was made a reality by bringing together mathematical concepts of
cellular networks, advanced ultra high frequency radios, low power microprocessors,

and improved batteries. It was not invented, although buried within it are innumerable
inventions, and several of the genii who design the world's best cell-phones do so just
south of Cambridge. The hybrid car combines the efficient modern internal
combustion engine with pollution free electric drive and systems that recycle the
energy dissipated in braking. The modern jet airliner combines innumerable
individual capabilities in mechanical design, aerodynamics, jet engines, electronic
communication and navigation systems, and the airports that they serve are wonders
of modern civil engineering. Other examples easily come to mind; the modern dental
surgery, flat-screen TVs, medical scanners, the ubiquitous scanning electron
microscope developed in this laboratory, electronic stock exchanges, Dyson's vacuum
cleaner, the apparatus used to decode DNA, the IPod, and so on. All of these new
technologies came about through a process in which established capabilities were
evolved and combined in new ways. They were the result of engineers seeking
solutions to practical problems and human need.
When fundamentally new materials or ideas are available the potential is even greater
but the route to useful products is longer and the commercial risks higher. Such is the
case, for example, with the polymer semiconductors that have emerged recently in the
Cavendish laboratory that offer no less than a revolution in computer displays and in
low cost electronics.
In this second Reith lecture I explore the origins of modern technologies. I believe
that today collaboration is essential for success because it brings both global
awareness and the ability to gather together diverse capabilities. It is rare that
individuals or groups working in isolation possess all that is needed. During my time
at Cambridge I concentrated on extending the bridges that provided global awareness
and enabled collaborations - with industry, with universities, with government.
Without joining with others, one quite simply does not have the resources to be
internationally competitive nor does one have the 'spirit level' that reveals whether or
not one is even in the race - complacency and smugness easily set in.
Mind you there are dangers in collaboration, especially in the security of ideas patents can protect ideas but necessarily give away the details when they are
published. Individuals have this dilemma. They need to be a part of the larger world
and communicate with it, but the moment they reveal their ideas, they have to be
ready to run fast or competitors will out-speed them. I will return to this question in
my third lecture.
The process of collaboration has been vastly enhanced by modern communications.
The World Wide Web, which Tim Berners-Lee originally developed to allow
physicists to work together, now allows creators of technology in every corner of the
earth to work together - or to compete. And it is amazing how the efforts of creative
engineers lead to advances and novel concepts that could not have been imagined by
those who carried out the original research.
Which brings me to the laser. Few now remember that the laser was an adaptation of
the earlier maser. The maser, an acronym for Microwave Amplification by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation, was a device devised by Charles Townes to meet the need for
an electronic oscillator that would operate at very high radio frequencies. It was an
electronic device. Townes proposed that a similar device should be possible that

operated at optical frequencies and two years later Theodore Maiman demonstrated
the first laser. The laser uses the same principles as the maser but operates at optical
frequencies, hence the acronym Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of
Radiation.
It was predicted in 1960, when the laser was first demonstrated, that it would
revolutionise optical imaging systems and make holograms feasible, but no-one could
have imagined the breadth of applications that were to emerge. No one could have
foreseen that lasers would be used to transmit the majority of the world's telephone
and television signals, or to record and play back sound and vision using plastic disks,
let alone the plethora of other applications that now benefit everyone. These were
subsequent accomplishments of technologists.
Telephone and television, and indeed all forms of electronic communications, are now
carried around the world by beams of light that are channelled down glass fibres. The
light beams are generated and modulated by solid state lasers that are so fast that a
single beam can, for example, carry tens of thousands of simultaneous phone calls. A
metal wire can carry about a hundred. An essential component in these optical
systems is the Erbium amplifier which allows the light signal to be amplified directly
without first converting it back to an electronic signal. This key advance was made by
British engineers.
The technology of optical communication had its earliest origins in science but
through most of its development it was a technologist's technology progressing
through a series of intellectual advances that outweigh those of the original
researchers. The achievements have been extraordinary - it has connected the world in
a way that engineers would have thought impossible thirty years ago and avoided a
log-jam in the Internet that people predicted twenty years ago.
These advances involved many people in many laboratories. One model says that ten
times the effort needed in the original research must be expended in developing a
prototype technology, and ten times this effort is needed to produce the manufactured
product. The idea that a single person can 'invent' a new technology, is out of the
question in these cases. Creative ideas of course come from individuals but their ideas
must fit into the matrix of creativity being generated by individuals and teams all over
the world.
I have discussed only two of the unexpected applications of the laser. I could have
told similar stories about its applications to materials processing, such as the reshaping of the lenses in our eyes, high quality welding, or precision measurement.
Even some of the humble and reliable printing devices attached to our home
computers apply low power lasers in an unforeseen manner. The successful
applications of the laser far exceed the most extravagant predictions made in the
1960s.
The process of improving existing capabilities and adapting them to new applications
relies on something that we do not need to teach, something that is inherent in the way
the best technologists operate. Creative engineers are, by nature, problem solvers,
always seeking ways to employ advances in technology in new and better ways. It is
an extraordinarily exciting activity. Look back to the era of the first European ocean

voyagers, the lack of reliable time-keepers to determine longitude, the reliance on
crude devices such as the cross-staff to make astronomical observations. The
navigators' achievements were astonishing, but consider where we are by contrast
today.
GPS, the Global Positioning System, because it built on the vast technological
achievements of humankind, belittled previous accomplishments. GPS had its origins
almost exclusively in technology. It uses principles related to those of land based
navigational systems but with the signals coming from satellites rather than ground
based transmitters.
The idea of building a satellite-based location system emerged when a number of
quite separate developments coincided. The cost of launching satellites became finite;
advances in microelectronics allowed the necessary electronics to be packed into a
small satellite and the receivers to be compact and reasonably priced; and finally, it
was seen that such a system could have military significance making available the
billions of dollars necessary to put up the twenty three satellites. This technology
grew out of space research and microelectronics and was funded by the military.
At the time it was decided to build the Global Positioning System, I suspect that few
would have foreseen that within a decade tens of millions of receivers would be sold
and that they would not just be used for navigating ships and planes. Farmers would
use them to guide their tractors, taxi fleets would be managed using GPS data, the
arrival of trains and buses would be announced, and authorities would keep track of
criminals on parole with GPS ankle bracelets. Standard cars would carry GPS-based
navigational systems and these would not only tell people where they were, but just as
importantly perhaps, the location of the nearest Indian restaurant.
But stop to wonder a moment about this technology. A GPS receiver contains up to a
dozen individual receivers each of which automatically searches the frequency
spectrum to find the tiny synchronised signals from the satellites. The receiver's
computer knows the exact position of each satellite, and from the time delay between
the signals it calculates its own position in three dimensions to an accuracy of a few
metres. A modern receiver takes a few seconds to locate the satellites, make these
measurements, and fix its position. And less than five centuries ago humankind could
not even reliably predict a rare astronomical event.
In 1992 I had the privilege of visiting one of the Royal Navy's nuclear submarines. It
had an electronic navigation system that performed similar functions. It occupied an
entire six foot high rack of electronics, cost a large fraction of a million pounds and
took five minutes to give a fix with an accuracy of a few hundred metres. One of
today's hand-held GPS receivers gives a ten times more accurate fix in a hundredth of
the time at one ten thousandth of the cost. This is a triumph of technology.
To create technologies like GPS, and indeed to make progress in any advanced
technology, engineers must be familiar with the full spectrum of technologies and
know what is hindering further progress. To do this they must be working at the
frontiers of development. If they are not then they cannot concentrate their resources
efficiently and their efforts will not be competitive. Working from first principles is
not effective as it opens up too many alternatives.

Obviously, progress is most rapid when the factors impeding progress are known.
This does not make the problems easy to solve, and indeed with most modern
technologies the solution generally requires an intimate knowledge of the science that
underpins the technology, but without knowledge of these factors focus is lost. Let me
trace the evolution of electronics as another example.
Electronics began with J J Thomson's identification of the electron in Cambridge in
1897. One could go back even earlier and seek the origins of scientific methodology
but let me start at the time that Thomson proposed that the 'rays' which Europe's
physicists had been experimenting with for many years were in fact streams of subatomic particles, 'corpuscles', later called electrons. J J Thomson used a glass bottle in
which he had embedded a cathode from which the electrons would emerge, and an
anode that attracted them. This was in effect a primitive cathode ray tube as used in
television sets although there was in fact some residual gas in the tube and there were
ions as well as electrons, but the simple analogy is none the less useful.
This primitive electron tube was adapted a few years later by John Fleming and used
as a 'detector' for weak electromagnetic signals in the earliest experiments in long
range radio transmission, that had been pioneered by Marconi. Fleming's diode was
superceded by the triode of De Forest. De Forest's third electrode allowed
amplification and created a universal electronic amplifier which was to become
known as the vacuum valve in the UK and the vacuum tube in the US. The
technology of electronics had been born and it was the vacuum valve that gave rise to
most of the electronic systems that we are familiar with today, including computers.
But engineers were not satisfied with the valve and following the second world war a
search for a better alternative began, which eventually led to the transistor.
The first transistor was developed by John Bardeen, Walter Brattain, and William
Shockley at Bell Telephone Laboratories in New Jersey in December of 1947. They
were seeking an alternative to the vacuum valve that was cheaper, lower power, and
less fragile: an electronic device that operated like the valve but did not have to
operate in a vacuum. Their device turned out to be perhaps the most important single
technological development of the 20th century; but these three pioneers could never
have imagined what was to come. By early in the twenty first century more transistors
would have been built than characters printed since the beginning of time. I will bring
this story up to date in the fourth lecture when I will discuss nanotechnology, which
had its origins in this laboratory.
Following the contribution of JJ Thomson, who was clearly motivated by the desire to
understand the universe, the development of electronics followed the route of most
successful technological developments. The engineers and scientists who made the
remarkable breakthroughs were not being driven by science, and a wish to understand
nature, their aim was to find useful applications for their knowledge.
Today, the fledgling electronics, that started with the elementary two electrode valve,
has reached extremes. A chip manufacturing plant costs several billion dollars and if
you have problems that delay the production of a new chip for six months you may
have lost 50% of the profit from that chip. And this industry is not alone in its
magnitude and complexity. The situation is similar in many other fields, certainly in

aerospace and in the automobile industries, and the resources needed to be successful
in the pharmaceutical industry are just as great and the adherence to schedule even
more critical.
By now it should be clear why it is not only difficult but impossible to make progress
in this sort of high technology if you are not already at the frontiers of development. If
you are not, then you have no means of knowing where to concentrate you efforts. It
is possible with a relatively small team to tackle new technologies but only if the team
is fully aware of the international competitive situation and is linked in with partners
that have the ability to proceed at a competitive pace. There can be no half-hearted
commitment
Advances equivalent to those of past centuries are extremely unlikely to be achieved
in the same way today, by the separate endeavours of often amateur researchers and
technologists. James Joule, working in a private laboratory attached to his father's
brewery; Michael Faraday, brought up as a bookbinder's apprentice and educated
through studying the books that passed through his hands; Thomas Newcomen, an
ironmonger and blacksmith: these and other giants of past ages made their
achievements partly alone and largely by happy chance. Such a course is probably
impossible today, but the excitement and thrill of achievement are just the same.
There are few more satisfying activities than the creation of new technologies for the
benefit of humankind. Creative engineers may not receive the recognition they
deserve in this country but it rarely troubles them - the satisfaction they derive from
their jobs is unsurpassed.

