Jeffrey Sachs
Reith Lectures 2007: Bursting at the Seams
Lecture 2: Survival in the Anthropocene
Recorded at Peking University, Beijing
SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to Beijing for the second in this year's series of
Reith Lectures entitled 'Bursting At The Seams'. Today we're in the Room of the Ten
Thousand Masses, at the China Centre for Economic Research at Peking University and yes, the university is still called Peking University. It's the first time the BBC has
recorded a Reith Lecture in China, and we couldn't be in a more appropriate place at a
more appropriate time. Last week our lecturer Jeffrey Sachs, the international
economist, set the scene for his argument, that all the world's great powers can and
must co-operate if our planet is not to descend into disease-ridden, poverty-stricken
devastation. Nowhere is more important in this process than China, a country of 1.3
billion people, now being transformed into a global power of enormous influence and
strength. What China chooses to do, and more importantly how she chooses to do it,
will be crucial in the next phase of the world's development.
This recent great leap forward of China's has already come at a price, not least in the
damage that's been done to its environment. It's still a one party state without
democratic elections, and many in the West believe that it can't play a full part on the
world stage until it address matters of individual liberty and human rights. Peking
University has a reputation in the People's Republic for revolutionary thinking, and
with us in our audience tonight are many of its students, as well as academics,
journalists, and businessmen, with whom we'll discuss these issues. But first, will you
please welcome this year's BBC Reith lecturer, Jeffrey Sachs.
(APPLAUSE)
JEFFREY SACHS: Good evening everybody, and what a thrill it is to be at Peking
University, and to be together with you. And what a thrill it is for me to have the
chance to give this unique lecture series, the Reith Lectures, and to take part in a
global discussion, a discussion that we must have in the beginning years of our new
century, if we are to achieve what we hope to achieve -- shared peace and prosperity
around the planet. I think we all sense that we are at very important decision points in
the planet, with obvious risks and huge opportunities. As Sue just said, there is no
place on the planet of more significance for these choices -- for its own sake as well
as for the world's sake -- as China today, a country that calls for superlatives in its
role, its dimensions, and the stakes for the world. Here we are in the famous,
beautiful, magnificent Hall of the Ten Thousand Masses, as it's called, but to account
for China's vastness we would need a hundred thirty thousand such halls of ten
thousand people each to accommodate the 1.3 billion people of this country, which
makes up one fifth of the world's population and is quickly becoming an absolute
epicentre of the global economy as well as many of the challenges that I'll discuss
tonight.
China has been at the centre of world history for millennia, and for large stretches of

world history China has been the leading power. Roughly from 500 AD to 1500 AD
China was clearly the dominant economic power and the dominant progenitor of
fundamental and leading technologies of all sorts, which empowered the world and
changed it in magnificently positive ways. And of course we all see and expect China
to play that role in the twenty-first century as well. After a long period of difficulty,
economic hiatus and internally and externally caused disarray, China clearly is in the
ascendancy in this century. It is far and away the most dramatic case of economic
growth in the history of the world. Never before have we seen rates of economic
progress, and what they signify -- deep improvements of human well-being taking
place at not only the pace but obviously the scale that we're seeing now, with each
decade bringing a doubling or more of living standards -- in a country of these vast
proportions.
So the superlatives of the economy are well known and they cross lips around the
world every day, but we're going to talk about another aspect of that challenge this
evening, and that's the superlatives of the environmental challenge that China faces.
Not only is it the world's most populous country, it is one of the world's most crowded
countries, and it is certainly one of the world's most environmentally stressed regions.
This is a challenge that has existed throughout China's history, but what has happened
in recent decades and what will happen in the decades to come poses qualitatively
new challenges that are emblematic of the unique environmental stresses that we all
face on the planet together -- some because of the special role that China will play in
the future, and some because China is experiencing the same kinds of phenomena as
in other parts of the world.
I called my lecture today 'The Anthropocene' - a term that is spectacularly vivid, a
term invented by one of the great scientists of our age, Paul Crutzen, to signify the
fact that human beings for the first time have taken hold not only of the economy and
of population dynamics, but of the planet's physical systems, Anthropocene meaning
human created era of Earth's history. The geologists call our time the holocene --the
period of the last thirteen thousand years or so since the last Ice Age -- but Crutzen
wisely and perhaps shockingly noted that the last two hundred years are really a
unique era, not only in human history but in the Earth's physical history as well. The
Anthropocene is the period when human activity has overtaken vast parts of the
natural cycles on the planet, and has done so in ways that disrupt those cycles and
fundamentally threaten us in the years ahead.
Now considering how we're going to face the dual challenge of continued economic
progress, which we dearly hope for in this country and in other parts of the developing
world, and continued economic well-being of course and progress, in today's high
income world, with the profound and growing environmental dangers that we face, is
the subject of our Reith Lecture today.
Let me set the stage. Our era is unique. We've never before experienced anything like
the human pressures on the environment as well as the human successes in sustained
and broad-based improvements of well-being. Ensuring that we can continue those
successes without going right over the cliff will prove to be our generation's greatest
challenge. Since the start of the Industrial Revolution, which we could date roughly to
the beginning of the nineteenth century - 1800 or so, perhaps a few decades earlier by
some historians' accounts, a couple of decades later in most places in the world - the

human impact on the environment has increased approximately one hundredfold.
Human population has risen from six or seven hundred million in the middle of the
eighteenth century to our 6.6 billion today, roughly a tenfold increase. Per capita
economic activity -- that is how much each of us on the planet consumes, produces,
draws upon natural resources for our sustenance and well-being -- has also risen by
typical statistical account, as hard as it is to compare over the course of two centuries,
roughly tenfold as well. With ten times more people, each of whom is engaged in ten
times more economic activity, we have two orders of magnitude, or one hundred
times, the influence of human activity on the planet. And this is coming at
unprecedented cost to physical earth systems. What's absolutely striking, and the
puzzle we need to solve, is this basic fact: What we are already doing on the planet in
terms of effects on physical systems is unsustainable. We cannot go on doing what
we're doing. We have already reached a point of literal unsustainability, in the sense
that if we continue on our current path, using resources the way we use them now at
the scale we use them now, we will hit very harsh boundaries that will do great
damage to human well-being, to the earth, and to vast numbers, literally millions, of
other species on the planet. But we have an even harder problem to solve than that
one, and that is that we do not want to stop here in terms of consumption or economic
activity. The developing countries -- and we're in the most populous of them today -which together make up five sixths of humanity, rightly and understandably and from
my point of view absolutely accountably and responsibly, say they would like their
place in the sun as well. If the high income world has achieved certain levels of
wealth, comfort, safety and life expectancy, what about the rest of humanity? From
my point of view as a development economist, something absolutely wonderful is
happening, something that I think we could even dub the Age of Convergence, and
that is that the measure of economic development, the methods, the institutions, the
processes, the adaptation of advanced technologies, are becoming a worldwide
phenomenon. Now tragically not every part of the world is yet part of that
phenomenon, and I will have the chance to discuss that in a later lecture, when we talk
about the poorest of the poor who are still not part of this dynamism. But the
wonderful news is that large parts of the planet are part of this dynamism - China of
course is at the very forefront in an unprecedented manner -- catching up in
technology, economic activity, and human well-being. Let's not doubt the
improvements of living, not only of conventionally measured living standards but of
human well-being and life expectancy, in nutrition, in opportunities, in chances to
fulfill life's hopes that come along with this economic improvement.
The processes now are made powerful by the strong winds of globalization -- the
market forces and the ability of ideas and technology to flow across national
boundaries at an unprecedented rate. The world economy is now growing at
approximately five per cent per annum, and that is four per cent approximately of per
capita income increases, and one per cent per year roughly of global population
increase. That means we are on course for a massive increase of economic activity,
just what we would like to see in the still poor countries of the world, those who
aspire to have the chances that technology and science have brought us. It is fair to
say that, given current trends, we have a powerful force of economic convergence in
most parts of the world, and if the processes of convergence continue to operate as
they have in recent decades, one could expect that perhaps the average per person
income on the planet could rise as much as four times between now and mid-century.
If the average income as measured by economists, statisticians, taking into account

the purchasing power of income in different parts of the world, is roughly eight
thousand dollars per person, one could expect perhaps that that would reach thirty
thousand dollars by mid-century, given the powerful and positive forces of economic
development.
Population of course, though increasing more slowly in proportional terms than it did
in the second half of the twentieth century, is still increasing in absolute terms by an
astounding amount of 70 to 80 million people per year. And on the medium forecast
of the UN Population Division, that leads to a projection of roughly an increase of
another two and a half billion people on the planet by the year 2050. That is a world
population increase of roughly fifty per cent, with income on a path, barring various
disasters, to increase approximately fourfold. Multiplying one and a half by four
suggests that the current trajectory would lead to an increase of world economic
activity of six times between now and 2050. That is the goal from the point of view of
economic development, but think about the paradox, if we already are on an
unsustainable trajectory and yet China, India, and large parts of Asia are successfully
barrelling ahead with rapid economic development at an unprecedented rate. We are
asking our planet to somehow absorb a manyfold increase of economic activity on top
of an already existing degree of environmental stress that we've never before seen on
the planet.
It is possible that we will not be able to increase sixfold in economic activity with
current technologies before the environmental catastrophes would choke off the
economic growth. The hardships in water stress, deforestation, hunger, and species
extinction, would cause this process to go awry, even before we are able to do more
damage to the planet. But that does pose the fundamental question - what will give in
the end? Many people think the only thing that can give are living standards in the
high income world, whereas others believe that we are bound for a bitter struggle
between the rich and the poor in the years ahead. I want to argue that the only viable,
peaceful way forward is a change of the way we live that allows for continued
improvement of living standards in all parts of the world and for catching up, but that
also permits us to square the circle of environmental stress and economic
development.
The Anthropocene is felt in so many areas -- habitat destruction, rising greenhouse
gases that are changing the climate and threatening us profoundly, water stress,
human dominance of the natural nitrogen cycle through heavy use of manmade
fertilisers that allow us to feed a world population of 6.5 billion people on its way to 9
billion, new diseases that emerge when human populations and animal populations
come into contact in new ways, and of course in the vast over-fishing, over-hunting,
over-gathering, and over-exploitation of natural resources in large parts of the planet,
leading to population collapses and species extinction.
I want to touch on one of these many aspects, because it is not only of central
importance, but helps to illuminate the challenge of squaring the circle of
development and environmental sustainability. Climate change, a vast challenge that
reflects at the core the fact that modern economic growth since the Industrial
Revolution has been built on the use of fossil fuels , which leads to the emission of
carbon dioxide and , through the greenhouse effect, the warming of the planet and
fundamental changes to the earth's climate. The effect was identified more than a

century ago, in 1896, but it has only come to our attention in recent years, because it
is only in the last couple of decades that we have come to understand just how big the
human effect is on the growing concentrations of carbon dioxide and a number of
other such greenhouse gases, and on our changing climate.
This is a case where what we are doing today is not sustainable, because each year we
are raising the carbon concentration in the atmosphere by two or more parts per
million of molecules in the atmosphere. When projected over the course of this
century, that rate of emission would lead to such a high level of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere that the climate would be changed, we now understand, to the point of
dire risk for us and for vast parts of the global eco-system. Species extinction, extreme
weather events, massive changes of precipitation, grave risks to food production,
disease transmission and the like, would all reach harrowing levels later in this
century if we merely continue to do what we're doing now. But here comes the
puzzle. With the world economy barrelling ahead, the amount of energy use is also
rising dramatically, and so too the use of fossil fuels, which will be in sufficient
abundance long enough for us to wreck the climate before we run out. And so if the
concentration of carbon dioxide is increasing by roughly two parts per million each
year, it could easily be four parts per million in a few decades, with the rate increasing
over time. The projections are that by mid-century we might have doubled the preindustrial concentration of carbon dioxide. By the end of this century, if we continue
on a business as usual course with the economic development we so hope for in this
country and in the rest of the developing world, perhaps the concentration will have
tripled or quadrupled. We know, as we learned once again by the recent scientific
consensus of the inter-governmental panel on climate change, which reported in its
fourth assessment round beginning in February of this year, that the effects of that
kind of increase pose risks to this planet that we simply cannot afford to take.
What can we do? Do we have to end economic growth? Do we have to end the hopes
of the developing world? Do we need dire cutbacks in living conditions, inevitable in
today's rich world? I believe that there is another course, and it's the course we must
take. There are at least three ways out of this conundrum. First of course is fuel and
energy efficiency, so that we can get more economic output with less direct use of
fossil fuels. Second of course is the substitution of non-fossil fuels for fossil fuels, so
that per unit of energy the emissions of carbon dioxide can be reduced, whether it's
with safely deployed nuclear power, or more economical solar power, or wind, or biomass, there's definitely a role, though perhaps not as dramatic as we might hope, for
non-fossil fuels.
There's a third alternative as well, and that is to learn to use our existing fossil fuels
safely. And for China and India this is perhaps the single most important hope for
these countries and for the planet. One idea on the drawing board which needs to get
into demonstration and production in this country as soon as possible - and that means
nearly immediately - is the idea of power plants that burn coal to generate electricity,
capturing the carbon dioxide that they would otherwise emit, pumping it into
pipelines and safely storing it in safe geologic reservoirs in the earth.
The big question for the planet is the unprecedented challenge to move to a
sustainable energy system, requiring a great degree of co-operation, foresight, and
planning, over a time span of decades. Can we do it? Can we find that level of public

understanding, political consensus, direction and determination? We may fake it with
nice speeches, but the climate will change whether we fake it or not. There is no
spinning this one. This one is dependent on what we actually do, not what we say we
do.
I want to mention one hopeful analogy, and that is how we have successfully as a
world avoided what was another desperate risk, and that was the depletion of the
ozone layer. That was also discovered by Paul Crutzen, the scientist who brought us
the Anthropocene. He and two colleagues, Sherwood Rowland and Mario Molina,
discovered, accidentally as it were, that the chemicals that we use for refrigeration and
for our aerosols, the chloro-fluorocarbons, or CFCs, posed a grave risk to survival on
the planet because of their accidental interactions in the stratosphere that could have
destroyed the ozone layer. It was an accidental, brilliant discovery. It took some years
for the public to become aware of it. When the scientists said it, the makers of the
CFCs said that it was junk science, that they'd heard it before. They went into denial.
But then NASA in the United States snapped a picture from one of its remarkable
satellites, showing the hole in the ozone layer. In a way it may be the picture that
saved the world, because as soon as people saw that hole with their own eyes, they
weren't listening to the Chairman of DuPont anymore, they were thinking about their
survival and the survival of their children. The public awareness soared, the pressure
for action increased. At that point DuPont and other companies' scientists went to
work. They determined there was an alternative to the CFCs, there were other safer
chemicals that could be refrigerants and aerosols. Then a fourth step took place. The
companies whispered in the ears of the politicians, "it's okay, you can reach an
international agreement, we can handle this." And quickly, -- from the basic science
to the international agreements took about fifteen years -- by 1990 a global framework
was in place that called for the phasing out of the chloro-fluorocarbons and has put us
on a path of at least relative safety with regard to that risk.
With climate I believe we have the same prospects now. It is a much more difficult
issue, a problem that gets to the core of the functioning of the world economy, so it
cannot be solved from one day to the next, requiring a basic change of our
infrastructure and our energy systems which will take decades to complete, but a
process nonetheless that I think is underway in the same way. First came the science,
back in 1896, and then the modern science in the last twenty-five years. And as soon
as the science came, came the companies with the vested interests claiming junk
science, because their instinct is to start lobbying. But you don't lobby against nature.
Nature has its principles: it doesn't matter what the boards of these companies say.
What matters is the actual physical mechanisms. The science was right, it becomes
more and more known.
Now like the ozone crisis, public awareness has been the second step. For a long time
climate change was discussed as something for the far future. Now it's understood as
something that imperils us today as well. The heatwave in Europe in 2003, claiming
more than twenty thousand lives; Hurricane Katrina, a storm of devastating
proportions, shocking the American people and the world about what climate can do;
the mega-drought in Australia that took place this year, and destroyed a substantial
part of Australia's export crop; the massive typhoons being experienced by this
country, as well as the warming taking place in large parts of this country, and severe
droughts in the interior of China - have all made climate change an immediate issue,

an understandable issue, and one that of course will get worse, no matter what we do
right now, for a while, because we are on a trajectory of worsening climate change
stresses that is locked in place for the near term.
The good news is that the scientists and the engineers are now scurrying.
Technological alternatives are being developed. Carbon capture and sequestration is
beginning to be put into place in demonstration projects. So too are alternative nonfossil fuel energy sources, and so too remarkable breakthroughs in energy efficiency,
such as hybrid and plug-in hybrid automobiles, which promise us vast efficiency
gains, more distance per unit of fuel.
The good news is that those technological breakthroughs are similarly leading the
companies to whisper in the ears of the politicians - "it's okay, we can handle this."
And that's the best news of all. Companies around the world are now in the lead of
their politicians. In fact they're telling the politicians we have to act, we want a
framework, we need an incentive mechanism, we need a price structure so that we can
move ahead with sustainable energy. I believe we're going to get there. Global
negotiations on a truly global framework open in December of this year, in Bali,
Indonesia. We've agreed in principle on a Framework Convention on Climate Change,
that we must stabilise greenhouse gases. We took an early small step in the so-called
Kyoto Protocol, but this only involved a very small set of commitments for a limited
part of the world - mainly Europe, because the United States did not even join. Now
in December we must have the US and China, and India, and the European Union,
and other parts of the world, all coming together and saying we must do this for
ourselves and for the future. Nature has spoken more loudly than vested interests.
This is not a matter of vested interests, it is a matter of common interest. These steps,
from the science to the public awareness, to the technological alternatives, to the
international agreements, are the very steps that we will need for all aspects of the
Anthropocene. This will be the mark of our new era - science-based global policymaking based on worldwide public awareness. That's going to be true for saving the
rain forests, for saving our oceans from over-fishing, for managing water stress, and
for choosing population alternatives that are sound for the planet and sound for
individuals as well. We don't have to accept the population trends, because people
would choose fertility reduction voluntarily in large parts of the developing world, if
the alternatives were made available to them. We can do this, and we will learn that
the costs of action are tiny, compared with the risks of inaction. Climate change can
be solved, according to the best current estimates, for less than one per cent of world
income each year, and perhaps well under that, where the potential costs are a
devastating multiple of several per cent of world income if we continue on the
business as usual trajectory.
I want to end where I started the first lecture, with my favourite speech by President
John F. Kennedy. He talked about the challenge of peace. That is our biggest
challenge on the planet. And peace is also threatened by environmental risk. But he
also told us in that speech that we have chances. He said, and I repeat because I think
it is our common thread: "Our problems are man-made, therefore they can be solved
by man. And man can be as big as he wants. No problem of human destiny is beyond
human beings. Man's reason and spirit have often solved the seemingly unsolvable,
and we believe they can do it again."4 That is the spirit of the Anthropocene.

Thank you very much.
(APPLAUSE)
SUE LAWLEY: Jeffrey Sachs, thank you very much indeed. I'm now going to take
questions from people here in the Hall of the Ten Thousand Masses of Peking
University, and I'd like to invite, to put her question first of all, Yu Yang Jie, who's a
third year economics student here at Peking University. Let's have your question if we
may?
YU YANG JIE: Thank you Professor Sachs. My question is about, to what extent
should we protect the environment, because when there is a conflict between
environmental protection and economic development, it's unwise and also impossible
to totally stop the economic development for the sake of environmental protection. So
my question is, how should we find the optimal balance between the two?
JEFFREY SACHS: The choice that sometimes puts economics versus the
environment is largely mistaken in that the environment is part of the economic
wellbeing, it's not in contrast to the economic wellbeing. Now let me say that choices
that we actually face on how to use land, how to fish, how to use our energy
resources, are less dire and less painful than we think, if we look closely at our real
opportunities, especially with technology. I talked about the new kinds of sustainable
energy systems that we can adopt at relatively low cost, but let me talk about another
issue - massive over-fishing of the oceans, leading to a destruction of the fisheries.
China is the pioneer now at a global scale of an alternative agriculture, so massive fish
farming - and China farms perhaps eighty to ninety per cent of all of the world's fish
now - that's a technology, farming the fish rather than depleting the oceans, that gives
us hope.
SUE LAWLEY: Right there let's… Yes?
MAN: My question is that how can you make Chinese to understand this issue, ...
millions and millions of people they are just see their hope to become rich or have the
opportunity to change their material life.
JEFFREY SACHS: The point is that the costs of this are not to say to the Chinese
people "you will not achieve economic development," or to the American people for
that matter, "your income levels will be deeply undermined." The point is if we
mobilise our science and technology well, if we prove and demonstrate and diffuse
carbon capture and sequestration or other technologies, we'll find that we can wisely
choose a course out of this. If we simply are too afraid, too neglectful, radically
greedy, or simple-mindedly shortsighted, then the dangers will mount well, well
beyond the cost that we would pay with clear action. That's what needs to be
explained.
SUE LAWLEY: Let me bring in James Kynge, who's a British writer who's lived and
worked in the Far East for the past twenty-five years. He's published a book about the
rise of China and currently heads the business operations here of Pearson, the
international media company. James Kynge, your question please?

JAMES KYNGE: Jeffrey, in your speech you've painted a picture, a really horrific
picture of a global environmental meltdown, and you've said that one of the keys in
arresting this is public advocacy - in other words giving people their voice, so that
those people can keep government and the big companies honest. But as you well
know, China is not big in giving people their voice. This is a topdown government. At
the central level there's a very keen understanding of the environmental issues, but
often at local level governments are corrupt and they're in bed with the big polluting
companies. So what would you say? Is it possible, is it remotely possible that China
will ever allow enough pluralism, enough public advocacy, and enough democracy, to
solve the environmental problems that you outline?
JEFFREY SACHS: It is not only remotely possible, I think it's very likely in fact.
These environmental challenges are not hidden from view, they're felt in the daily
lives of people living on the Yangtze, and the massive pollution that has been seen,
the heavy air pollution in the cities of China, and now a whole world that is going to
be saying to China, very soon, perhaps within the next three or four years, you, the
People's Republic, are the number one emitter of carbon dioxide in the whole world,
so whatever you think, you're affecting the whole world's climate. What's going to be
interesting is that as China overtakes the United States as the largest emitter, the US is
going to start complaining bitterly - what are you doing to our climate? And so what's
going to happen is that the whole world more and more will understand that this is
dire. We're seeing a change within just the last three or four years of public
awareness, not because of theory, not because of lectures, but because of what is
being felt in daily lives. I've had excellent discussions with the Chinese leadership
over the last year on these issues. They are fully aware of this. And I believe that this
is going to be the realisation in this country, in India, even in the United States. We're
finding in US politics a change in the last year that is remarkable - Katrina, and the
other forces of nature - Vice President Al Gore has brought that…
SUE LAWLEY: And disaster, and disaster.
JEFFREY SACHS: …brought that about.
SUE LAWLEY: And ... James Kynge…
JEFFREY SACHS: Once you get Oscars for climate change, you've got to know that
we're on our way!
(LAUGHTER)
SUE LAWLEY: James Kynge, what chance do you think there is of China
volunteering in beating the US to solving its carbon emissions?
JAMES KYNGE: I agree that the central government certainly has a big handle on
this, they realise the big problems. But what I've seen time and time again is that local
governments do not obey the central government, and they are corrupt, and they're not
thinking about the planet, they're thinking about their own short-term profits. And I
don't see any, really any progress in that regard.
SUE LAWLEY: Any other, really on this subject if I could - I mean I'd really like

some people who live here and who would like to speak on this subject. Yes, here we
are.
WOMAN: Okay. I'd just like, regarding James, what he just mentioned a moment ago
- I have a friend, he's a reporter from CCTV. One day they went to a county in ...
because the miner ... You know the mining thing, the coals - they want to shut down
those small mining illegal mine, mines…
SUE LAWLEY: Pits? Mines?
WOMAN: Mines. But this is the first day the central government sent to close it, but
the second month they opened it because the whole county's income is depending on
the mines. If they close there is no economy for that county, that's the problem.
SUE LAWLEY: I see that. Well look, let me just bring in now a questioner here on
the front row, because it's on this subject, Jeff, if I may. He's Ma Jun, who's head of a
research organisation here in China called the Institute of Public and Environmental
Affairs. Ma Jun, your question?
Ma Jun: Hi. I'm glad that you mentioned in today's world of globalisation we need
more co-operation on the global environmental governance. We are running a national
water pollution database, and recently when we prepared our list of, you know when
we collect a list of water polluters and we came across a file, I mean sixty, seventy
multinational companies, from Japan, from US, from Europe. And they were caught
by the local agencies who are violating the basic discharge standards. And this raised
question, raised concern over a global transfer of pollution in today's you know more
kind of globalised manufacturing. But some in the Western countries argue that if the
local companies are polluting, then the multinationals should not be blamed for doing
the same in this country, and I want to hear your comments on that.
JEFFREY SACHS: I think all of these points are correct, and also need to be
understood in a dynamic process. This is a, no doubt a fight for a new way of doing
things in this country and in the world. Many of the examples that have been given
could have been examples in any of our countries. Market forces by themselves are
often quite powerful and quite shortsighted, because markets don't include the social
damages that go along with these polluting or resource-depleting activities
adequately, and therefore we need a collective action that countervails the market. I
am not arguing that from one day to the next we're going to have a change that is
going to solve these problems, indeed I said many times just on the climate change
issue, this will actually take decades.
SUE LAWLEY: This is a question about double standards, this is a question about
multinationals doing their dirty work here, or devious Western entrepreneurs bringing
their toxic waste here, whether it's old computers or whatever…
JEFFREY SACHS: No no no it's what I say that…
SUE LAWLEY: If, if the West, if the West is doing that here, what chance is there of
getting the kind of co-operation from here, from China, with the West, to achieve
what you're, what you're advocating?

JEFFREY SACHS: I agree, it's… I don't call it double standards, it's just we have
poor environmental performance all over the world. There's not any place in the world
that is truly environmentally sustainable now because the whole…
SUE LAWLEY: Sure it's got to stop, but how is it going to stop?
JEFFREY SACHS: …because the whole, because the whole world climate is being
changed. But we are also in a process of tremendous global recognition and rise of
understanding of this, just in a short period of time. I will predict that by 2010 we
have a post-Kyoto agreement reached, one that does include all countries - China, the
United States, the European Union and others - that agree to targets that are serious
about heading off this kind of environmental catastrophe.
SUE LAWLEY: In three years' time China and the US will all agree to it?
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY SACHS: That's what I said. I'll say it again - I believe that by 2010 we will
have a post-Kyoto global agreement.
SUE LAWLEY: And what leads you to believe that? What evidence do you have?
What have you heard? You know, how do you know that?
JEFFREY SACHS: Yeah, I, I don't know it, I'm predicting it, and I'm…
(LAUGHTER) And I'm, and I'm predicting it on the basis of the argumentation that I
made, which is that these issues go from the science to the public awareness, to the
technological options, to the agreements, and I think we're in that phase right now
actually.
SUE LAWLEY: What's different about right now?
JEFFREY SACHS: Not only am I saying things are changing, I'm actually putting a
date on it as well. I believe that by 2010 we will have an agreement. I believe, to be
more specific, that every major presidential candidate in the United States for
example, in the 2008 election, will have a strong climate change plan. So we'll see
that in real time, whether I'm right or merely dreaming.
SUE LAWLEY: Okay.
JEFFREY SACHS: The reason I believe that this is happening is that the scientific
consensus is sound because the major oil companies are actually running
advertisements every day in the global press about the dangers of climate change now.
Something has changed for the better, and that's the point I'm making.
SUE LAWLEY: I'm going to bring in Charles Hutzler now, who's the Bureau Chief
here for Associated Press. Charles, your question please?
CHARLES HUTZLER: I'd like to re-focus the question a little bit, and maybe go off
target slightly. The Beijing Olympics are approaching, and as that time draws near

there's even greater attention going to be placed on China. Can a government that
routinely suppresses dissent, and whose values seem to be so at odds with the other
major powers, really gain the respect and find a way to work with other governments
to achieve the solutions that you're talking about?
JEFFREY SACHS: I think so. China is changing, it inevitably will change, so we
can't look at this as a snapshot, we have to look at it as the drama of life that it is, for
one fifth of the world. China's politics will change, China's governance will change,
over time. But we are talking about a form of statecraft here which has lasted more
than two thousand years, and has had its remarkable successes in many ways of
keeping internal peace for very very long stretches, for hundreds of years, while
Europe was destroying itself in unprecedented proportions. The success of Chinese
statecraft is extraordinary. There will be a decentralisation of power, there will be a
change in the way things have been done from a centralised state over two thousand
years, but it's a little bit like the climate change issue as well - this is not a year to year
event, this is something that will come in the course of decades in this country.
SUE LAWLEY: We're coming towards the close now. I'm going to bring in here
Jonathan Watts, who's the Guardian correspondent here in South-East Asia. Jonathan,
your question please?
JONATHAN WATTS: Thank you. I came back today from Linfen, which has for the
past five years been declared as the most polluted city on the whole planet. And it was
particularly horrible, but the message was contradictory. There was, on one side the
local government said that they were going to close down a hundred and sixty of a
hundred and eighty-nine iron foundries, which says, as you've said, that there is more
environmental awareness here. On the other side lots of local people said we don't
believe the government, we don't trust the media. The people I spoke to said we could
get in trouble if we speak to you, and others said we don't want this environment but
we can't change it, we have no way of affecting government policy. So my question is
this. Economically China's transformation has been incredibly exciting, but
politically, as has been said today, this is still a one party dictatorship. What do you
think is the role of public accountability in improving the environment? And if I could
just be a devil's advocate - in some ways wouldn't it be better if we had a green
dictatorship to solve the world's problems rather than a green democracy?
JEFFREY SACHS: Well I think that public accountability is extremely important, but
the problem that you cite of these foundries is not a problem of one political system,
it's a problem of local economy, that is true in the United States or China, or many
other places, where you have a local economy depending on a, probably a defunct
technology at this point, that has built up a set of jobs in an environmentally
unsustainable manner. And that is a tough challenge anywhere. So one needs a set of
instruments and institutions to provide either alternatives to help retrofit factories, to
provide compensation for environmental adjustment, and so forth, and a lot of those
institutions don't exist in this country because the challenges are only being faced
right now for the first time.
SUE LAWLEY: But the implicit question was how important is democracy, or some
advent of democracy here in China?

JONATHAN WATTS: Absolutely. I think, I agree with most of what you've said but
I think you kind of dodged that question, as so many foreigners, foreign leaders and
foreign businessmen coming to China now do, is not want to talk about human rights
and democracy because they've got other things on their plate. There are an awful lot
of people doing work in environmental issues, and NGOs who, maybe they wouldn't
call it democracy but I think they would like more tools to be able to influence
government policy, and the tools in the West were often a free media and votes, and
those things they, we still don't have in China.
SUE LAWLEY: So Jeff, how important is greater democracy to China's development,
in your view?
JEFFREY SACHS: I think that China will become more democratic over time, and I
think that China will become, as I say, more decentralised over time as well. This is
the nature of the developments taking place, and they're already apparent in this
country. If one has any sense of change that's taking place, this is already happening,
and it's happening to the good. And I really don't believe that outsiders coming and
making simple claims really helps the process. I do believe that China's politics are
for the Chinese people, and I believe that these changes will come, they will be in
China's interest, they will be in the world's interest, but the way that the world should
best handle this is to help China to achieve its goals and define global common points
of meeting on global challenges like climate, like global security, because these are
the ways that we can build trust, build understanding and build a framework where
change can take place in a peaceful and useful way.
SUE LAWLEY: Thank you very much indeed. Thank you to our lecturer.
(APPLAUSE) And thank you, too, to you, our audience, and our thanks of course to
our hosts here at Peking University. Next week we go home with Jeffrey Sachs to
Columbia University in New York, where he's Director of the Earth Institute. There
he'll be continuing his analysis of how we manage a world which is bursting at the
seams, as he discusses what he's termed the dethronement of the North Atlantic.
That's next week. For now, from China, goodbye.
(APPLAUSE)

