Jonathan Spence
Reith Lectures 2008: Chinese Vistas
Lecture 2: English Lessons
Recorded in St George's Hall, Liverpool, broadcast on 10 June 2008.

THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS TAKEN
FROM A LIVE EVENT. THE NATURE OF THE EVENT MEANS THAT NEITHER
THE BBC NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE
THE ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to the Victorian splendour of St. George's Hall in
Liverpool. Built as a concert hall and as a law court, it was possibly the only place in
19th century Britain where you could listen to Beethoven and be tried for murder
under the same roof. Historically, the port of Liverpool was the hub of much of
Britain's imperial expansion and has many links with China. Chinese merchant
seamen, initially hired by Liverpool's Blue Funnel Line, supported Britain in two
World Wars and some then settled here. Today it's twinned with one of China's
biggest and most important cities, also a great port: Shanghai. So it's an appropriate
place in which to hold one of this year's series of Reith Lectures, which is entitled
'Chinese Vistas'.
The lectures are focused on the history and the culture of China, an explanation of
how the development of a country that's emerging as one of the world's great
economic powers is inextricably bound up with its past. Last week, we heard about
Confucius, the great Chinese philosopher, whose ideas still influence his country
today. This week, our lecture is called 'English Lessons' and will explore what
happens when Chinese and British ideas meet. The relationship between China and
Britain has never been an easy one. Our lecturer is a man who's better placed than
most to try to help us understand how that relationship will unfold as our future in the
United Kingdom becomes increasingly dependent on what happens in China.
He's a historian whose books about China are regarded as the leading works in their
field. It's his belief that the country's history holds the key to its present. Ladies and
gentlemen, please welcome the BBC's Reith Lecturer 2008, Professor Jonathan
Spence.
(APPLAUSE)
JONATHAN SPENCE: Thank you, Susan, for that wonderful introduction and
welcome everybody. I'm delighted to be giving this second Reith Lecture in
Liverpool. As Sue mentioned, not only because it's home to such a vibrant Chinese
community - it was one of the earliest significant communities in Europe - and also
because this year you are the European Capital of Culture. And so not only is this the
60th Reith Anniversary, which is a particularly happy event in Chinese customary

thinking, but we also now have this second perfect connection with a wider cultural
world as well.
In my first lecture, as Sue said, I took a long view, trying to bring Confucius into the
present era - a long scamper as it were of a lecture from the 5th century BC down to
the year 2008; but in this lecture, I want to be not quite so bold, but to look at the
interconnections between China and especially the West, which I'm interpreting here
in terms of the United Kingdom and the United States. So I call this 'English Lessons',
in some ways playfully, in some ways perhaps trying to remind us of the difficult side
of these relations. Who is the pupil, who is the teacher in such lessons? What are you
passing on and why? What kind of self-esteem do you feel that you think should be
shared? When are you making perhaps serious mistakes in the way you try to project
yourself in another country?
And I'll bring us up to the present just for a second to remind us how many Chinese
students are now from China, studying in the United Kingdom; how many of our
students, British students are studying Chinese language. I've been told that just over
2000 at this moment are preparing for their O Levels in Mandarin Chinese. This is a
formidable venture and I salute those - I know some of them are in this room - I salute
those of you who are making this leap.
So in the name of the Chinese visiting here and our students getting ready to go there,
this lecture is kind of directed in a way to you.
So my feeling then is that these English lessons started round about the year 1620 that's about where we'll start our story - when foreign contacts developed with China,
initially through traders; partly government controlled traders through the East India
Company, which had been given a monopoly by the Crown of some of the more
adventurous essays into fortune building in the Far East, based in India itself and also
increasingly in China. British ships - some of them from here - pushed their way
through the South East Asian peninsulas and areas to land in Ningbo, in Macau
(Macao), in Guangzhou, and other cities on China's East Coast itself.
Now these early trading ventures were in fact violent - full of clashes, full of
misunderstandings - and I'm afraid there's no doubt that the British sailors on those
ships and their commanders acted violently when they were not given the trading
privileges that they sought. How they expected to be treated, I'm not sure. And yet
they represented some other sort of mixture of values that we've seen at other times
ever since that period. At the same time, they admired the Chinese. There was
violence in the air, but there was also strong admiration. And there was admiration for
what the British already saw was the size of China and the apparent sophistication of
its administration over such an enormous territory and so many people. Though
scholars still argue a lot about the nature of Chinese population and its size, I think
most of the people who study population figures would feel that in the 1630s period
China's population was probably over about a hundred and seventy, a hundred and
eighty million people and was growing.
So there was admiration, there was violence. There was also difficulty learning the
language because the Chinese government was unwilling to let Westerners learn
Chinese. Language was seen in other words as a protection of your security, and we

know from some records that early Chinese who offered to tutor Westerners in
Chinese language could be imprisoned or even executed. So Westerners wanting to
learn Chinese in this period had to do so in secrecy if they were in the Chinese world
or in one of these Chinese cities near the coast.
They were forbidden to travel inland, they were forbidden to move inside the gates of
China's cities, so the Westerners had to camp outside - outside Guangzhou in the
marshy area near the Pearl River, outside Shanghai in the marshy areas along the
Huangpu - many of you may have seen.
It was an uneasy period. And the countries groped towards each other in terms of
language by developing a curious hybrid mixture of language, which we now call
Pidgin English. I don't know how many people know Pidgin English now, but it was a
kind of newly coined language form in which, using Chinese grammatical sentences
and a mixture of English and Portuguese and Indian and other words, a simplified
trading language was developed that let the two countries communicate. And it had an
extraordinary life as a language. It let people very rapidly deal in goods and tariff
issues and a few basic legal issues and some problems of the exact nature of the trade
items you were dealing with. It let you handle all these things with the vocabulary of
only a few hundred words. I'm not saying we should add this to our curriculum in our
overburdened schools, but still it is a fascinating linguistic structure.
One group I'm particularly drawn to were those among … particularly among early
British traders in China and a few of the early missionaries who after learning Chinese
for a few months decided that the Chinese language was a plot, an extraordinary plot
to baffle Westerners and make it completely impossible for them to understand or do
dealings with the Chinese. They decided that the Chinese were keeping an impeccable
front and pretending to understand their own language (LAUGHTER) when strong
and stalwart Englishmen knew of course that that was not the case and they, therefore,
tried to crack the system that the Chinese were using. And using that word 'to crack', I
was thinking particularly that perhaps the greatest crackpots, as we now call them,
were those who sought a key to the Chinese language and offered increasingly short
spans of learning that would give you the mastery of the language. My favourite is the
man who in the 17th century suggested that China could be learned if you bought his
key in less than three weeks. (LAUGHTER) So this in fact never happened, but some
of these keys and the searches for them have been maintained. We can actually study
some of them in libraries.
Now in this period, after that opening up the rather tentative difficult period between
particularly British traders and the Chinese themselves, without going through
dynastic dates and all this sort of thing, a series of sort of pulses can be seen coming
into this relationship between China and the Western countries. One was the
beginning of memoir writing. This was the world of early traders, early travellers,
early missionaries who were in China anywhere from the 17th to the early 19th
century and they became memoir writers. They were spellbound with what they saw
in China and they tried to share this with us. So we begin to get … we might call it a
foreign witness, foreigners bearing witness to the realities of Chinese life and politics
and religion and everyday family affairs. There were births of a new kind of fiction, a
fiction about China or fictions using Chinese characters, fictions telling us stories (in
as much as we were able to understand them) of what Chinese life must be like. And,

again, those writers in the English language covered this with great skill, I think, and
great subtlety.
One of my favourites is Oliver Goldsmith, and Goldsmith wrote an entire two-volume
novel called 'Citizen of the World' - a beautiful title, 'Citizen of the World' - in which
he wrote the entire novel through the eyes of a Chinese man visiting London. And so
it was a kind of double joke in a way: he created a Chinese fictional visitor to a very
real city and had him write home letters and had the responses coming from Chinese
back home. He added one phrase - I'll just throw this into the lecture, it just came into
my head - that may have resonance with those Chinese visiting us now from China.
Goldsmith wrote in this novel, has a character say in this novel:
'You know, I think these British people are trying to reason me out of my own country.
They're trying to push their pressure on me to get me to lose my sense of what it is to
be Chinese.'
And I thought if I had more research time, I'd like to know if people in the 18th
century read that sentence and saw that it had the power that I think it does now. How
often do we try to reason people out of their own cultures because of our analytical
stance or our feeling of superiority or our sense that we have a different kind of skill
than they do.
So then okay memoirs are a aspect of this, fictions are a part of this, and the growing
use of diplomacy is a part of it, and a new generation of diplomats began to
experience the complexity of trying to deal with this very powerful nation as they
began to understand its very restrictive ideas about trade and access and openness and
its insistence that foreigners coming to China do the unbelievable thing of obeying
Chinese law and thinking through Chinese reasons for limiting trade, limiting access,
learning the certain cities who are out of bounds, learning that certain kinds of
descriptions of territory had military significance and might be confiscated. I won't
belabour that point, but diplomats began to study and learn. Religion began so spread
as Protestant missionaries began to move ahead of the Catholic missionaries. From
about 1805, 1806 onwards, we began to get a new generation of Western missionaries
going to China, many of them British, having learned basic Chinese from Chinese in
London and they were pretty well prepared when they got there. Some of them took
their tutors with them on the boats because the boat journey was so long, so why
waste that six months when you could be learning Chinese? And so the tutors came
with them to the country and settled there with them.
It's a period of translation and of the key backing to the idea of translation, the first
composition of a good Chinese English dictionary in which the languages were shared
and pulled together by, actually, missionary scholars at the same time as they
compiled their dictionary to translate the whole of the Bible into Chinese. And this
feat was finished with the first draft version around about 1830.
And then there was the problem of trade imbalances as the West tried to find trade
goods that the Chinese wanted, so that they could pay for their export goods in terms
of porcelain and silk and other precious manufactures from China. And the story of
the 18th century and the early 19th century in this term of lessons learned from other
countries was that the British were spectacularly unsuccessful in finding trade goods

that the Chinese wanted or needed. They couldn't find either. And it is this
melancholy failure of the balance of trade that leads to the under girding, as it were, of
the opium business in China. Opium started to be sold by British traders and later by
American traders to the Chinese because the West simply could not find enough
products to attract the Chinese in a sort of barter exchange at the time.
Opium trade led to war, as many of you will know. The first, and properly called, I
think, Opium War was between 1839 and 1842, what I think we could call a sorry
war, which the Chinese lost to successful British firepower. And it led to the first of
bitterly unfair exchange treaties between China and foreign powers, what was called
the Treaty of Nanjing in 1842, after which the Chinese were forced to yield major
concessions financially to the West and major areas of territory. Such treaties rarely
succeed because you do not get what you want - that's what happened to the British and so you fight another war to get a better treaty, by which of course for the Chinese
is a worse treaty. And the British did that in turn between 1856 and 1860. Then the
French did the same later in the 19th century and the Germans did the same at the
very end of the century. So you get a series of unfair wars linked to unfair treaties, all
in the name of the expansion of trade and all covered with a delicate veneer of
diplomatic language and treaty obligations and agreements. And as part of those
treaties, the Westerners won the right - as they called it - they won the right to live in
Chinese cities of their choosing under foreign treaty protection and to be allowed to
use their own law in China instead of Chinese law. This is obviously still a very vexed
and complicated area, but the tension in the discussions of this particular problem can
be dated very much to about the 1840s, 1850s, that kind of period.
And then there was migration. The beginning of large scale migration comes from
Eastern China, particularly from Guangdong and Fujian Provinces. Probably the first
wave of major immigration was in fact to South East Asia and then there was also
fairly steady movement to Latin America and the Caribbean, which has been much
less studied. But by the 1850s, large numbers of Chinese were going from Eastern
China to California, as we know, in the gold rush, but many more were going to
Washington State and to Oregon and to the Deep South in fact: Mississippi and
Alabama in the United States. And by the 1870s, as we know from Liverpool's
history, larger numbers were beginning to move to this country as well. And Sue
referred to the Blue Funnel Line, the famous shipping line based in Liverpool, that
increasingly crewed its ships with Chinese skilled engineers and mechanics as the
Blue Funnel became famous for the technological advances of its own ships' engines,
as I understand it, bringing new levels of efficiency and profitability to the shipping
lines between Liverpool and the Far East.
And it was these Chinese with their technical knowledge who were able to work on
the ships, often settling in Liverpool in the first versions of Chinatowns I think
anywhere in the United Kingdom, so they would be conveniently near the harbours
when new Blue Funnel fleets were getting ready and were trying to get their engine
room staffs together. And so it became customary for the agents for the Blue Funnel
Line to scour the little areas I've been trying to look at today, around Pitt Street and
Nelson Street, and so on, where the Chinese had their boarding houses and their
hostels, and where they also began sometimes to marry or live with Western women
from the same areas and to start small Chinese families or communities of their own.

And so Liverpool became a kind of high tech migratory base in a sense for a very new
series of ventures.
Now another aspect of this would be if we jump forward again with this idea of
lessons and experiences, we find by the later 19th century - let's say by the 1880s or
1890s - that English is now beginning to be taught formally as it were in Chinese
schools at two levels. One is in the first version of an imperial university in China
founded after in fact one of these unfair wars when the Chinese were essentially
forced to alter their educational system to suit aspects from the West. But you began
to get English lessons at the formal level from the Manchu government, and at the
same time you began to get missionary teaching of the English language from people
coming from this country or from the United States. And with the mission education,
the mission schools in China opened up education for girls and young women and
moved the idea of a concerted education across the gender gap, and a new generation
of young Chinese women became able to learn Chinese side by side with the men.
Western literature increasingly was now being translated into Chinese, matching those
other versions of translating Chinese classics into English, which was completed in
the 1870s and 1880s when the famous books of Confucius and the back up classics
that went with them had all been translated by remarkable scholars from Chinese into
English and published in British publishing houses. At the same time the Chinese
began to be able to read Western political theory, Western novels, Western poetry in
Chinese and to try and psych out what exactly it was that made our society tick.
The aspects of trade and growing numbers of immigrants led to tension and hostility,
particularly in the turn of the last century, round about 1904 to 1910. I was struck by
some of the really difficult racial slurs and the complexity of treatment of Chinese in
Liverpool during that early period. But we find it matched in the United States very,
very clearly with discriminatory legislation across the United States and we find it
matched by a Chinese response which has been very little studied, but as early as
1906 the Chinese began to boycott the goods of those countries that had treated them
particularly badly. So an economic boycott is a sophisticated weapon and the British
merchants were not used to being boycotted with the few goods that they had to sell
and such boycotts also spread against Japanese goods and also United States as well
as British objects of trade. And this was difficult for the government to handle. They
were beginning to understand how to handle it when in 1911 the last Chinese dynasty
fell - the only date I'll force upon you today. 1911, ending the huge imperial system
and leaving in fact what was a very weak Chinese Republic to try and deal with these
pressures from the Western powers.
And in the period following this boycott and the collapse of the actual empire, we got
more and more Chinese beginning to go overseas in search of education. We got
many coming to English schools and universities and we had another kind of
exchange, which again has not been very much studied, which is the fact that about
170 000 Chinese workers came to Europe during World War I and there they worked
in fact in an non-combatant role for the British or the French - worked in the trenches,
worked digging trenches, worked cleaning up the battlefields, if you can imagine what
that was like, removing the corpses and trying to help with unloading ships, stacking
munitions, running prisoner of war camps. There was a huge range of Chinese
activity. And, again, I know just from something I was reading a few days ago that in

I believe it's your Anfield cemetery one can find a few Chinese grave markers from
those at that time.
And I think probably the last example I'll dwell on here a little bit would be World
War II in the mix of all this. There was such a lot now of exchange, language was no
longer quite the same sort of problem but the relationships between the powers
involved here were very central.
But World War II, as it was seen in the Far East, was a shock, especially the collapse
of the British in Hong Kong and the British Forces in Singapore at the end of 1941 as
the Japanese began the war in earnest. And this shock, I think this blow is something
from which the sort of classic form of British power in the Far East never actually
recovered. And so World War II became a very riven kind of area for these
relationships between China and the English speaking world. The war ended in
another series of actions, which I only learnt recently about from a scholar in this
room herself. That is the problem of the repatriation of Chinese seamen, especially I
gather from Liverpool, at the end of World War II because throughout these dark
years of the war the Chinese had continued to volunteer for convoy duty on the
extremely dangerous run between the Northern United States and Canada and foreign
harbours, but especially Liverpool, facing many U-boats and threats from the
Germans. And so the large number of Chinese casualties and then the difficulty and
danger of that life made it all the more regrettable and all the more resented, I think,
that many of these Chinese were repatriated without any kind of legal procedure at all
from the summer of 1945 onwards; indeed from homes and houses very near where
we are now. And without going into making the present too negative because there
are people here working so hard and succeeding so wonderfully in so many lines of
business, I think we still have to acknowledge that there are difficult tensions for
Chinese communities in this country. The idea of illegal immigration is now another
burden I think that has been placed around some of the Chinese who are legitimately
here working at their own agendas.
So with that, I'd just like to say that the next lecture will deal with what I'd call the
search of identity and roots among the Chinese as they try and make their way
through both British society and the society in the United States. I'm calling this
'American Dreams' because some of these dreams came true but an awful lot of them
vanished when people woke up. Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
SUE LAWLEY: Professor Spence, thank you very much indeed. I'd now like to invite
the audience here in Liverpool to discuss some of those English lessons with our
lecturer. We have some questioners here towards the front, but I'd very much like to
have some opinions and comments from others of you, so do put up your hands as we
begin to open up the question areas that interest you if you feel you have something to
add. Our first questioner is one of the two thousand, Jonathan that you were talking
about. He's a student who's studying Mandarin in this country. He's Tom Fraser who
is in First Year Sixth at the Merseyside Calday Grange School. Tom, you're studying
Mandarin at A level, I think?
TOM FRASER: For AS level, yeah.

SUE LAWLEY: Right, what's your question?
TOM FRASER: My question is that the 19th century was considered a humiliation for
the Chinese after the Opium Wars in 1840 and it proved disastrous with the Chinese
at the hands of the British. Do you still feel that that's a historical legacy felt today?
JONATHAN SPENCE: You might think that that would be a sort of rather forgotten
memory by now, but this Opium War has been used in countless Chinese publications
has been used to define the beginning of modern Chinese. And I find that very selfdefeating to choose to study your own modern history based on this period of
humiliation and failure, and it was hard to break away from that and get more sense of
reality about what the Chinese were achieving in the 19th century.
SUE LAWLEY: Do you want to come back on this, Tom?
TOM FRASER: Yes. Do you feel that, if it is so publicly studied, do you think that
that would affect any relationships we still have with China today in that if we're
doing so much business with China; do you think that they'd still consider that as
something that we've done to them?
JONATHAN SPENCE: The issue I think is now no longer a real one in any important
sense and to harp on it now is not something the Chinese have to do. It's something
they can do if they wish to keep an old pain alive.
SUE LAWLEY: I'm going to call in Yvonne Foley who's sitting here. She was born
here in Liverpool, weren't you Yvonne, of Chinese and British parentage; one of the
offspring of the arrival of Chinese settlers here that Jonathan was telling us about?
YVONNE FOLEY: Yes, my father was actually a seaman from Shanghai and my
mother was an English woman. After World War II, my father and the father of many
here today were actually forced to leave the UK. People like us were very much the
product of Anglo-Chinese trade. I'd be interested in your view, Professor Spence, of
why the real history of Chinese in this country remains virtually unknown?
JONATHAN SPENCE: Well I have to speak for all the historians who've said
nothing. I think it's just … it's slowly emerging as a topic. It's taken time. I can
remember when I found a book came out about all the Chinese in World War I by
Summerskill, if I remember, which is now a standard in the field by the way. I saw
this in a tiny ad, privately published, and I sent my little cheque and the book arrived
about four days later and I was completely fascinated by it. But it started because he
was on holiday in France, this middle-aged man on his own who loved travelling, and
he was zipping along the back roads in France near the Belgian border when he saw a
little sign, wooden sign. It said, 'A le Cimetiere Chinois' - to the Chinese cemetery.
For a second he didn't do anything. He just registered it, the way you do when you're
driving along. And then he yanked on the brakes on his car and said, "What? What do
you mean to the Chinese cemetery?" It became a quest, a personal fascination with a
strange moment of the past. And this I think is partly in answer to your story - you
need a trigger to get going. And the same thing is now happening with the Chinese in
Britain in many, many different levels. People are looking at their own fathers or

grandfathers. They are getting in touch through email and so on with other relatives
who may be in Singapore or Adelaide or the United States and including your work
on this.
SUE LAWLEY: But this is a particularly shocking story, isn't it...
JONATHAN SPENCE: Yes.
SUE LAWLEY: … because I think I'm right in saying that your father was pressganged out of Liverpool; was shipped home without a by-your-leave.
YVONNE FOLEY: They were forced out. The men were actually forced out. They
were forced out in a very unpleasant way. They had got themselves into a situation of
debt because they had no money. They weren't allowed to have work. Government
didn't allow them to have work and so they were offered a one way passage back. And
a group of us are here today, a lot of our mothers went to the grave believing that
they'd been deserted.
SUE LAWLEY: But the question is that why is this only emerging some fifty-five
years on?
JONATHAN SPENCE: Sixty years on.
SUE LAWLEY: It's only just in the past few years this story's come to light.
JONATHAN SPENCE: And there are other examples. In the United States, for
instance, a surprising amount of Chinese fought in the American Civil War on both
the Union side and the Confederate side, and it's taken a century for people to even
think that was a meaningful and now absolutely fascinating area. And I think if you
and your group can get this story told, you have an absolutely remarkable historical
topic.
SUE LAWLEY: We've got David Yip here who … He'll forgive me for saying this
because it's a handle you have to live with. You made your name in this country as
The Chinese Detective on the telly in the 1980s. Anyway, David Yip, you are also the
product of such a family, aren't you?
DAVID YIP: Yes, that's right; I'm a son of a Chinese seaman and a local girl. But
following on from what Yvonne said, what you're saying, I mean history is only given
for those who are visible, those who stand up. What has continuously frustrated me is
the fact, is the invisibility of the community I belong to. We are incredible
overachievers in the fields of education and business; but in the world of politics,
media, my own profession of the arts, if we are seen it's the usual stereotypical image.
I'd just like your thought on the fact why the British Chinese community still on the
whole remains invisible.
JONATHAN SPENCE: That's getting me to double guess across all kinds of borders
that I may not have the mental power to transcend. When does one choose to achieve
visibility? When is it some random act that can lead to this? When does a group
coalesce or flow together in some particular way? When would British-Chinese want

to be more active in national politics, for instance, is there any strong barrier to this?
Is it more that South Asians have been coming from a background in India, perhaps,
where they had parliamentary experience of some kind? These are very hard to
calculate.
DAVID YIP: But my feeling is that actually in a funny sort of way the West is too
much in love with the East and actually the people who were left behind with the
Diaspora, when they left China, in fact get in the way slightly between the East and
the West because scholars would normally or people would normally go straight to
the source and actually are not too interested in what was left behind in the trail.
JONATHAN SPENCE: Right. Could it be that the Chinese communities here actually
come from a pretty disparate range of backgrounds, from Hong Kong Chinese to
Guangzhou Chinese, you know to Fujian and so on, and so they've been particularly
concerned with slightly smaller groupings when they get to a country like this. I think
it'll come and I think you'll get the coverage you want and you can use academic
societies to help you.
SUE LAWLEY: Comment over here. Tell us who you are first.
BILLY HUI: Billy Hui from BBC Radio Merseyside's Orient Express. Just on a
subject that's connected to that but slightly wider - with your looking at the history of
Liverpool and also the Chinese community and the integration of Chinese
communities here, what are your viewpoints on the Chinese community in Liverpool,
compared with others that you've seen around the world?
JONATHAN SPENCE: I think that's a hard one because I've only been here for about
three hours. (LAUGHTER) And though I'm a bit of a globetrotter, I haven't really
been as thorough as I should. I would say it's obviously a small community here and
it's been relocated I guess in other ways. I gather there was a large scale demolition of
large Chinatown areas I think in the 1930s and then the German bombers did a good
job after that in the middle of World War II, so it's been a hard hit community. But it's
also been a rather fragmented community in Liverpool because of people moving
from Liverpool out to Manchester or Birmingham or wherever it might be without
leaving a really strong inner nucleus, and I think probably the more powerful
Chinatown associations would be found in cities where there's been a strong
inspiration to stay together, to hold on to some common bond as it were. Sometimes a
Chinatown split along ideological or regional lines and that's now true in New York
with the Fujian against the Guangzhou. It's a very, very difficult and tense battle and
difficult for the police to know how to handle this, how much to get involved.
SUE LAWLEY: I'm going to take a question over here.
DERMOT FINCH: Thank you. I'm Dermot Finch. I run the Centre for Cities.
Jonathan, you mentioned earlier that Liverpool in the 19th century was a high-tech
migratory base. You could argue that in this century that cities like Shanghai are the
high-tech migratory bases sucking in talent from the rest of the world. How optimistic
are you that cities like Liverpool and other UK cities can sort of learn those English
lessons in reverse now and tap into the growth and the high-tech opportunities that
China now offers?

JONATHAN SPENCE: I think that's a wonderful question. The expansion of that city
is so astonishing; I'm not sure Liverpool wants to or can keep up. But the Chinese
themselves have to try and double guess where the profits are going to go, what their
next step is going to be. I'm not a businessperson, I hasten to add. I'm just … I'm just a
person (LAUGHTER) and I've never made any money by investing in anything. They
always seem to go the other way round: the second I buy them, they go right down,
and so even my little postal savings book hasn't got much in it. But so how do you
gauge where … It's not going to be enough to go right now. You've got to work out
where we're going to be in a few years time, I think China is finding itself now
outsourced to Vietnam and outsourced to the Philippines. There are very big changes
going on right now. So I'd say don't be alarmed out of it, but I wouldn't put all your
money into it.
SUE LAWLEY: (LAUGHS) And you won't be putting any of your money into it by
the sound of it. But we're talking about Britain and China understanding each other.
I'd like to bring in Tian Du Yang and he was one of the organisers of what's called the
419 Committee who actually demonstrated against what they saw as biased reporting
in the Western media recently over the Olympic torch relay. Tian Du Yang.
TIAN DU YANG: Hi Professor. Well my question's actually quite related to the
invisibility of the Chinese community in Britain. I think there is a theory which
suggests that there's part of Chinese culture to stay low key in a community rather
than being you know politically active, to you know get out there - what my elders
have taught me when I was young, you know to sort of stay low key. But I think that
has changed. I think you know the protestors have been better understood of how to
properly use their right to protest. I think that's quite a milestone in the democracy
progress of China, people's you know ability how to properly use these rights. I think
it's quite a global consensus among the Chinese people that the Western media is
misrepresenting of China and also its government. You know the sort of impression
that the media is getting is evil Communist block sort of thing. I don't know how
much you would agree with me on that?
JONATHAN SPENCE: I guess at it's heart what you're asking really - at what level is
political activism a new kind of freedom of expression and how that is then covered
by the media makes it like a double problem, you know. What is it that makes the
media respond to what it is that you or others are trying to do in terms of protest? I
think that there was not much sympathy expressed for the Chinese government in this
current predicament. It was sharp in its bias in many cases. So in that sense you have
a point, I believe.
SUE LAWLEY: You've got your answer. There you are. I'm going to have a quick
comment from the woman in red there.
DR RED CHAN: I am from Warwick University. My name is Red Chan. 2008 for
China is a big year because of the Olympic Games, but unfortunately we've seen a
chain of natural disasters starting in the Spring Festival with the snow storm disasters
and then now we have the earthquake. So amidst all those very complex media
representations is there a chance this crisis could actually be turned into an
opportunity for better understanding?

JONATHAN SPENCE: What can be seen here is Western feelings about China are
very emotional and are very volatile and they change with great speed; and the
building up of sympathy here didn't have to be created on any political grounds at all,
it was natural. And this agonising situation I think almost forced people to realise that
there's more going on in this country than you know some kind of political repression.
And I think in some cases it might make China seem more vulnerable all over again
or more incompetent all over again. That doesn't seem to be the point at all. It's just it
should make us a bit more maybe generous about the future, a bit more sensible about
how we see China's attempts to handle these colossal problems that it faces.
SUE LAWLEY: One last question -- a very, very brief one, a comment if you would.
KEGANG WU: Just a brief comment. Kegang Wu, Chief China Advisor for British
Chambers of Commerce; just a comment about the Chinese representation in the UK.
I don't believe Chinese committee as a group collectively is not visible; in fact it has a
very high profile in things like media coverage. But individually in political influence,
in the Law Society, in the mainstream society, it's a voiceless community. It doesn't
get around the table to talk about the issues, that is of interest to the Chinese
community.
SUE LAWLEY: And why doesn't it?
KEGANG WU: The culture has been perceived in this country as self-sufficient,
enclosed community, they don't need help. And I have a view. I think Chinese
community in certain parts of these countries, including in Liverpool, is actually
struggling. Because they have to work twelve hours a day, seven days a week to earn
their economic status, to educate their sons and daughters. They hardly have any time
to actually get engaged in other activities.
SUE LAWLEY: Why are you suggesting they have to work harder than Asians,
Africans, any other ethnic minority?
KEGANG WU: Because most of the Chinese community in this country, 75% of
them are engaged in catering related business and there's very, very low margin in
their business. They compensate that low margin by working harder, long hours, and
they hardly have any social opportunity to engage with mainstream society.
SUE LAWLEY: Jonathan, I wonder if you want to comment on that at all.
JONATHAN SPENCE: It's an interesting comment, and the point here is I think this
has been experienced by many other immigrant communities and in a sense this work
is being done for the children; the most important thing to work for, which is a better
chance for your own children, more opportunities for them, more ways they can
search for niches within the society to express themselves, and it's an ongoing
process.
SUE LAWLEY: There are lots more comments. I can hear this is going to go on after
we finish...
JONATHAN SPENCE: I know.

SUE LAWLEY: ...but we're going to end. We hope to be shining more light on the
uneasy relationship between China and the West next week when we'll be in New
York and Professor Spence will be delivering his third lecture, which is called
'American Dreams'. And we've heard here tonight from BBC's - from British Born
Chinese - there we're going to be learning from ABC's - American Born Chinese.
For now, my thanks to you, our audience, here in Liverpool, and to our lecturer - our
60th Anniversary Reith lecturer - Professor Jonathan Spence, thank you very much
indeed.

