THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS
TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME AS IT WAS BROADCAST. THE
NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC
NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE
ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.

REITH LECTURES 2009: A NEW CITIZENSHIP
Presenter: Professor Michael Sandel
Lecture 2: Morality in Politics
TRANSMISSION: 16th JUNE 2009
RADIO 4

9.00-9.45

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to Rhodes House in Oxford for the second in
this year’s series of BBC Reith Lectures. Designed by Sir Herbert Baker, this is a
magnificent retreat for the university’s Rhodes scholars: students from around the
world who’ve been awarded fellowships to study for degrees at Oxford.

The scholarships were set up under the will of that one-man colonial whirlwind, Sir
Cecil Rhodes. He wanted his legacy to enable students who displayed qualities of
truth and courage, essential to good public duty. Bill Clinton was a Rhodes scholar,
and so indeed was our Reith Lecturer this year: Michael Sandel.

And public duty is very much what this year’s four lectures are all about. He’s called
them ‘A New Citizenship’. He began last week in London by addressing the issue
surrounding the moral limits of markets. Tonight his subject is one that’s very close to
public concerns in Britain currently. It’s called ‘Morality in Politics’. Please welcome
the BBC Lecturer for 2009: Professor Michael Sandel.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Just a few words before we begin, Michael. I mean when you were
here - 1975, wasn’t it - were you a kind of long-haired activist?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well long-haired, long-haired student.
1

SUE LAWLEY: (LAUGHS) But you had been an activist, I think, at high school in
LA, hadn’t you?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think you’re thinking of the story about when I was
President of my student body class in high school, yes.

SUE LAWLEY: And you went pursuing the then Governor of California, who was
one Ronald Reagan.

MICHAEL SANDEL: I went to high school in Pacific Palisades, California, where
he lived, he had his home. I thought it would be fun to try to bring him to the school
where almost everyone, all of us, disagreed with his politics. It was a Left Liberal
student body.

SUE LAWLEY: But how did you persuade him to come?

MICHAEL SANDEL: First I sent a letter, which was ignored. Then my mother
learned reading a magazine that he liked jelly beans. So I bought six pounds of jelly
beans, put them in a box with a bow, and delivered them to his house where there
were state troopers and guard dogs barking. And about a week later, he called the
school and said he’d come. (LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: So what happened? Did you really do him over?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well I prepared … I was a high school debater, Sue, and
thought I was really very good, and Ronald Reagan held views that were anathema to
me and my classmates. So I prepared the toughest questions I could muster and for 25
minutes or so grilled him in front of the 2,000 plus students. And somehow he
charmed everyone in the room and then left! (LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: What is the moral of this story: beware the charm of politicians, or
don’t be bedazzled by celebrity? I mean what went wrong with the grilling you
2

prepared?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well either I wasn’t good enough or he was too good.
(LAWLEY LAUGHS) And he went on, having been Governor of California at the
moment, to work his charms on the American people.

LAWLEY: Michael, I’m sure you’re good enough for us and I’m sure you’ll work
your charms on us this evening. Can I invite you to deliver your second lecture?
Thank you.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you, Sue.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well thank you, thank you very much. It’s a great pleasure
being here. Returning to Oxford brings back many fond memories, including one
related to the subject of my previous lecture about markets and morals. When I was in
Oxford back in the late 1970s, they still had separate colleges for men and women and
the women’s colleges had rules against overnight male guests. These rules were rarely
enforced and easily violated. Or so I was told. (LAUGHTER) Pressure was growing
to relax these rules, which became a subject of debate at St. Anne’s, which was then
an all women’s college. Some of the older women on the faculty were traditionalists.
They opposed allowing male guests. They believed in protecting the moral virtue, as
they saw it, of their young women students. But times had changed and the
traditionalists were embarrassed to give the real reasons for their objection, so they
translated their moral argument into an economic one. “If men stay overnight”, they
argued, “the costs to the college will increase”. How, you might wonder? “Well”, they
said, “they’ll want to take baths, and that will use hot water”. (LAUGHTER)
“Furthermore”, they argued, “we’ll have to replace the mattresses more often”.
(LAUGHTER) The reformers met these arguments by adopting the following
compromise: each woman could have a maximum of three overnight guests each
week provided each guest paid 50 pence a night to defray the costs to the college. The
next day, the headline in The Guardian read: ‘St. Anne’s girls 50 pence a night’.
3

(LAUGHTER) So there you have a lesson in the perils of reducing moral
considerations to economic ones.

My theme in these lectures generally is a new citizenship. In this lecture, my subject
is morality in politics. I’m not referring here to the morality of politicians. I’m
referring instead to the role that moral and religious argument should play in political
discourse and in justifying laws. Many people shudder at the prospect. “Isn’t it
dangerous?”, they ask, “to bring morality and religion into politics? Isn’t it safer for a
government to try to be neutral and avoid taking sides on the moral and religious
convictions its citizens espouse?” I say no, not necessarily, for two reasons. First, it’s
often not possible for government to be neutral on substantive moral questions; and,
second, the attempt to do so can make for an impoverished public discourse.

Let me begin where I left off last time with a case about buying and selling. Some
couples are unable to bear children of their own, but they don’t want to adopt. They
want a genetically related child, so they provide the egg and sperm and hire a woman
to carry the pregnancy for them: a surrogate mother. When the surrogate gives birth,
she turns the child over to the commissioning couple. Commercial surrogacy is illegal
in the UK and in most European countries. In the United States, some states permit
the practice and others prohibit it. Even where it’s legal, it’s quite expensive.

Confronted with high costs and legal restrictions, people have turned to a familiar
solution: paid pregnancy is now outsourced to low cost providers. In 2002, India
legalised commercial surrogacy in hopes of attracting foreign customers. And in
Mumbai, an obstetrician recently told the London Evening Standard that she delivers
on average one baby from a surrogate for a British couple every 48 hours. From the
standpoint of market efficiency, outsourcing pregnancy to women in the developing
world makes perfect sense. The money the women earn (around 7500 dollars) is often
more than they would make in 15 years. For the prospective parents, hiring an Indian
woman to bear their child is a great bargain. The total cost is about a third of what it
would be in Britain or in the United States. Everyone gains. And yet there is
something unsettling about this new global industry. One source of unease may be a
doubt about consent. Have the women freely chosen to bear other people’s babies for
4

pay? Or are they driven to it in effect by force of poverty and economic necessity?
But even if we’re satisfied that the arrangement is not coercive, there remains a
further moral question - not about consent but about degradation. Does treating babies
and pregnancies as commodities degrade them? Does it fail to value them in the right
way?

Elizabeth Anderson, a moral philosopher, has applied a version of this idea to the
surrogacy debate. She argues that surrogacy contracts degrade women and children by
treating them as if they were commodities. And by degradation, she means creating
something in accordance with a lower mode of valuation than is proper to it.
Commercial surrogacy degrades children, she argues, because it uses them as
instruments of profit rather than cherishes them as persons worthy of love and care. It
also degrades women, Anderson argues, by treating their bodies as factories and by
paying them not to bond with the children they bear. The surrogate labour is
alienated, Anderson writes, because she must divert it from the end which the social
practices of pregnancy properly promote; namely an emotional bond with the child.

So this idea that there are certain proper ends or purposes to social practices, this idea
suggests that to determine the right way of valuing things, we have to figure out the
purpose, the end of the social practice in question. And this idea is an idea that goes
all the way back to Aristotle. Let me give you a very brief summary of Aristotle’s
theory of justice. Justice means giving people what they deserve. That’s it; that’s my
summary of Aristotle’s theory of justice. (LAUGHTER) Now of course who deserves
what depends on the kind of thing being distributed, so Aristotle says suppose we’re
distributing flutes. Who should get the best ones? His answer: the best flute players.
Why? Well the most obvious reason - you might be thinking - is that this will result in
the best music, making everybody better off. But this isn’t Aristotle’s reason. He
thinks the best flute should go to the best flute players because that’s what flutes are
for: to be played well. The purpose of flutes, and of musical performance generally, is
to produce excellent music. It’s also to honour and recognise those who are great
musicians. That’s why the best musicians should get the best flutes. But this case
seems too easy. Most people would agree that flutes are for the sake of producing
music. What happens if people disagree about the purpose of the activity in question?
5

Is it possible to reason about the purpose of social practices in the face of
disagreement? Aristotle believes that it is, and I think he’s right.

Now let’s shift from flutes to golf. Here is an Aristotelian story about a controversy
over golf. Casey Martin was a professional golfer with a bad leg. He had a circulatory
disorder and so walking the golf course for 18 holes caused him considerable pain and
posed a serious risk of fracture. Despite his disability, Casey Martin was an excellent
golfer. He asked the PGA, the Professional Golfers Association, for permission to use
a golf cart during tournaments. They said no. Martin took his case to court. He argued
that the law about disability accommodation, the Americans With Disabilities Act,
required reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities, provided (as the law
said) that the change did not fundamentally alter the nature of the activity. That was
the law. Some of the biggest names in golf testified in the case. Arnold Palmer, Jack
Nicklaus, Ken Venturi all defended the ban on carts. They argued that fatigue is an
important factor in tournament golf and that riding rather than walking would be an
unfair advantage. Believe it or not, the case went all the way to the United States
Supreme Court. What’s interesting about the case is that as the justices wrestled with
it, they found themselves facing an Aristotelian question. The court had to determine
the essential nature of the activity in question: is walking the course essential to golf
or merely incidental? To resolve the question about Casey Martin’s rights, the court
had to determine the purpose or the essential nature of the game. What do you
suppose they decided? Well the court ruled 7 to 2 that Casey Martin had a right to use
a golf cart. The court concluded that accommodating his disability by letting him ride
in a cart would not fundamentally alter the game, which was - the justices concluded mainly about making shots, trying to get the ball into a very small hole.
(LAUGHTER)

What, after all, was the conflict over the golf cart really about? On the surface, it was
about fairness. But if fairness were the only thing at stake, there would have been an
easy and obvious solution: let all golfers use carts in the tournaments. But this
solution was anathema to professional golf, even more unthinkable than making an
exception for Casey Martin. Why? Because the dispute was less about fairness than
about honour and recognition - specifically the desires of the PGA and top golfers that
6

their sport be recognised and respected as an athletic event. Let me put the point as
delicately as possible. Golfers are somewhat sensitive about the status of their game.
(LAUGHTER) It involves no running or jumping and the ball stands still.
(LAUGHTER) No-one doubts that golf is a demanding game of skill, but the honour
and recognition accorded great golfers depends on their sport being seen as a
physically demanding, athletic competition. If the game at which they excel can be
played while riding in a cart, they’re recog… (LAUGHTER) their recognition as
athletes could be questioned or diminished. So whoever’s right about the essential
nature of golf, the federal case over Casey Martin’s cart offers a powerful illustration
of Aristotle’s point: debates about rights are often unavoidably debates about the
purpose of social institutions, the goods they allocate, and the virtues they honour and
reward.

Let’s turn now to a hotly contested contemporary issue: the question of same sex
marriage. It’s a prominent issue in the United States. Several American states now
permit gay marriage; many others allow for civil unions or civil partnerships. These
are arrangements that stop short of marriage but grant legal protections, inheritance
rights, hospital visitation rights, child custody arrangements and so on to unmarried
partners of the same sex who live together. So here’s the question: should the state
recognise gay marriage on the same basis as marriage between a man and a woman?
Some people say yes and argue for same sex marriage on what they claim are neutral,
non-judgemental grounds. Whether one personally approves or disapproves of gay
and lesbian relationships, individuals should be free to choose their marital partners.
Now if this argument is a sufficient basis for according state recognition to same sex
marriage, then it’s true - the issue can be resolved without entering into controversies
about the purpose of marriage and the moral status of homosexual relationships. But
the case for same sex marriage can’t be made on neutral or non-judgemental grounds.
Here’s why. The debate over same sex marriage is fundamentally a debate about
whether gay and lesbian unions are worthy of the honour and recognition that in our
society state sanctioned marriage confers, so the underlying moral question is
unavoidable. To see why this is so, it’s important to bear in mind that the state can
take three possible positions toward marriage, not just two. First, it can recognise
marriage only between a man and a woman, though perhaps offering gay men and
7

lesbians civil partnerships, as the UK currently does. That’s policy one. Or policy
two: it can recognise same sex marriage on an equal basis with heterosexual marriage,
as my home state of Massachusetts has done. Or three: it could decline to recognise
marriage of any kind and leave this role to private associations and religious
communities. Now the third policy is purely hypothetical. As far as I know, no state
or country has renounced marriage as a government function. But policy three is the
ideal libertarian solution to the marriage debate. It doesn’t abolish marriage, but it
does abolish marriage as a state sanctioned institution.

Michael Kinsley, an opinion journalist with libertarian sympathies, defends this
policy, this third option, as a way out of what he sees as a hopeless argument over
marriage. The solution, Kinsley writes, is to end the institution of government
sanctioned marriage or to privatise marriage. Here’s how he puts it. Quote: Let
churches and other religious institutions continue to offer marriage ceremonies. Let
department stores and casinos get into the act if they want. And, yes, if three people
want to get married or one person wants to marry herself and someone else wants to
conduct a ceremony and declare them married, let ’em. That’s Kinsley. So he
proposes in effect to replace all state sanctioned marriages, gay and straight, with civil
partnerships.

Now relatively few people on either side of the same sex marriage debate have
embraced the disestablishment proposal, but this third option helps us see why
proponents and opponents of same sex marriage must contend with the substantive
moral and religious controversy about the purpose of marriage and the virtues it
honours. Many who defend a right to same sex marriage try to rest their claim on
neutral grounds to avoid passing judgement on the moral meaning of marriage, and
this attempt draws heavily on the ideas of non-discrimination and freedom of choice.
But these ideas can’t by themselves justify the right. If freedom of choice were all that
mattered, the state would have no grounds for limiting marriage to two persons.
Consensual, polygamous partnerships would also qualify. And if the state really
wanted to be neutral and respect whatever choices individuals wish to make, it would
have to adopt Kinsley’s proposal and get out of the business of conferring recognition
on any marriages. This would be the equivalent, in the case of marriage, of letting
8

everyone ride in a golf cart if they chose. The real issue in the gay marriage debate is
not freedom of choice, but whether same sex unions are worthy of honour and
recognition by the community, whether they fulfil the purpose of the social institution
of marriage properly understood.

The Massachusetts Court that became the first court in the United States to require
recognition of same sex marriage understood this point. Though the court gave a nod
to neutrality and freedom of choice, it made clear that it did not intend to open the
way to polygamous marriage, nor to call for the abolition or disestablishment of
marriage. Chief Justice Margaret Marshall wrote the opinion for the court, and in
making the case she stepped outside the bounds of liberal neutrality to affirm the
moral worth of same sex unions and to offer a view about the purpose of marriage
properly understood. More than a private arrangement between two consenting adults,
she wrote: marriage is a form of public recognition and approval. In a real sense
there are three partners to every civil marriage: two willing spouses and an
approving state.

If marriage is an honorific institution, what virtues does it honour? To ask this
question is to ask about the purpose of marriage, and this is really the heart of the
dispute. Opponents of same sex marriage claim that the primary purpose of marriage
is procreation. Since same sex couples are unable to procreate on their own, the
opponents argue they don’t have a right to marry. They lack, so to speak, the relevant
virtue. This line of reasoning is at the heart of the case against same sex marriage and
Justice Marshall took it on directly. She disputes the claim that procreation is the
primary purpose of marriage, and she does so by showing that marriage as currently
practised and regulated by the state does not require the ability to procreate.
Heterosexual couples who apply for marriage licences are not asked about their
ability or intention to conceive children. Fertility is not a condition of marriage.
People who have never consummated their marriage and never plan to may be
married; people who can’t stir from their death bed may marry. So wrote Justice
Marshall for the court. And so, she concludes, it’s the exclusive and permanent
commitment of the married partners to one another, not the begetting of children, that
is the sine qua non of civil marriage.
9

So how does the argument work? Part of the argument consists of an interpretation of
the purpose or essence of marriage as it currently exists. Another part of the argument
is to ask which interpretation of marriage celebrates virtues worth honouring. What
counts as the purpose of marriage partly depends on what qualities we think marriage
should celebrate and affirm. This makes the underlying moral and religious
controversy unavoidable. What is the moral status of gay and lesbian relationships?
Marshall is not neutral on this question. She argues in a court opinion that same sex
relationships are as worthy of respect as heterosexual ones. So the case for same sex
marriage is not neutral, after all. In order to decide who should quality for marriage,
we have to think through the purpose of marriage and the virtues it honours, and this
carries us onto contested moral terrain where we can’t remain neutral toward
competing conceptions of the good life.

What does all of this tell us? The attempt to detach arguments about justice and rights
from arguments about the good life is mistaken for two reasons: first, it’s not always
possible to decide questions of justice and rights without resolving substantive moral
questions, and this is true whether we’re arguing about surrogacy or about how to
distribute flutes or political authority or the right to use a golf cart or same sex
marriage. Arguments about justice and rights are unavoidably arguments about the
moral meaning of the goods at stake. The second reason is that even where it may be
possible, it may not be desirable.

And that brings me back to the question of revitalising our public discourse in
democratic life. But if, as I’ve argued, it’s not possible for government to be neutral
on these disagreements, is it nonetheless possible to conduct our politics on the basis
of mutual respect? The answer, I think, is yes. In recent decades, we’ve come to
assume that respecting our fellow citizens’ moral and religious convictions means
ignoring them, leaving them undisturbed, conducting our public life in so far as
possible without reference to them. But this stance of avoidance makes for a spurious
respect. Often it means suppressing moral disagreement rather than actually avoiding
it. This in turn provokes backlash and resentment, as we see in the rise of religious
fundamentalism. A more robust public engagement with our moral disagreements
could provide a stronger, not a weaker basis for mutual respect. What would that look
10

like? Well rather than avoid the moral and religious convictions of our fellow citizens,
we should attend to them more directly - sometimes by challenging and contesting
them, sometimes by listening and learning from them. It is always possible that
learning more about a moral or religious doctrine will lead us to like it less, but we
cannot know until we try. A politics of moral engagement is not only a more inspiring
ideal than a politics of avoidance. If it’s true, as I’ve tried to argue, that our debates
about justice are often inescapably arguments about the good life, then a politics of
moral engagement is also a more promising basis for a just society. Thank you very
much.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Many thanks indeed, Michael Sandel. And now I’d like to open it
up for questions from the floor here in Rhodes House in Oxford where we have an
audience certainly of academics, but I think we have politicians, students, and many
of the good people of the city too. I think you’ve been writing down some questions,
as we went. Please continue to do so and they’ll be collected. I’ll try and feed them in
as we go. But in fact I’m going to call the first question because we felt it only fitting
that we should begin with a Rhodes scholar, and we have one here with us. Her name
is Kate Brennan and she’s from Australia. Kate Brennan, your question please?

BRENNAN: You’ve spoken of the problem with public debate. Many of the
traditional forums for debate such as political meetings have been in steep decline for
decades. How then in a globalised world do you envisage this new public debate
taking place?

MICHAEL SANDEL: What I think we need to try to do is to try to build institutions
of civil society that cut across national boundaries and provide ways of debating
questions that spill across borders. And also to build up those forms of civil society
that may be closer to citizens than national assemblies are, or national newspapers, so
that more local particular sites within civil society can contribute to a rejuvenation of
democratic discourse.

11

SUE LAWLEY: What do you feel about that, Kate? I mean it sounds to me as if
you’re not acknowledging the existence of the Internet there.

BRENNAN: I think when you talk about bringing these kind of debates closer to
people, then the Internet probably plays a role in that. So I’d be interested to hear
what role you think the Internet with its new media could play in that type of process
and how will it affect democracy?

MICHAEL SANDEL: My hunch is - and I don’t know the answer to this - my hunch
is that the prospect is mixed. The good news of the Internet is that it provides a cheap
way to communicate. The not so good news is that the Internet can’t possibly hope to
replace direct personal engagement. So even as we take advantage of more universal
forms of political communication such as the Internet, I think there’s going to be a
growing demand and hunger for more particular forms of political identity and
communication and association.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call Evan Harris I think, at the back there, who’s a
local MP here in Oxford, for Oxford West and Abingdon. Evan Harris, your question
please?

HARRIS: Thank you. I do a lot of public policy on abortion and gay rights and
assisted dying and embryos, and it seems to me that it’s not the morality that’s
missing on either side. I come from the non-religious side and I would say that I bring
morality - the principle of non-discrimination, the principle of not harming someone
unless there’s evidence that your policy creates harm. Obviously the religious side
bring their morality. But one side, I think, tends to bring evidence and an acceptance
that their position might change with evidence; whereas another side, the religious
side, is much less likely to accept and consider evidence and bring that to the table
because their moral position is relatively absolute. And so shouldn’t we be arguing
that we should bring evidence into the moral arguments, where appropriate, not bring
morality in when it’s already there on both sides?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I agree with what may be the impulse behind your worry,
12

which is that if people simply assert dogmas rather than offer reasons and listen to the
reasons given by their interlocutors in public debate, that’s not a very valuable
contribution. Where I think you and I may disagree is on this. I don’t think that those
who enter into public discourse and advance moral arguments that may be informed
by faith traditions, I don’t think they have a monopoly on dogmatic assertions. I think
there are dogmatic secularists, just as there are dogmatic religious fundamentalists.

SUE LAWLEY: A question here.

NGAIRE WOODS: Hello, I’m Ngaire Woods based here at Oxford University.
Some would say you know politicians have outsourced morality. When they get a
difficult moral decision to make, they appoint a commission to advise them. And of
course when politicians do claim a moral case for their action, I think the public rather
worries that the politicians might be saying it’s right because it’s right for them, but
not necessarily because it’s morally right for the nation or for the whole of the good of
society. I’d love to hear from you where is it that politicians fit in? Would you keep
them out of your moral discourse? Or if you’re going to put them in, how are you
going to put them in?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I would make greater demands on them and try to lift them
up, so that they can make a better contribution than typically they do. But as for
outsourcing to commissions moral judgements, sometimes the creation of
commissions to grapple with hard moral questions can actually be not a way of
sweeping under the rug a serious moral question that arises for policy or law, but a
way of enlarging public debate and argument about it. As for politicians being very
bad at making arguments, that’s always going to be true in politics. The question is
what is the alternative? I think one of the things that so struck and stirred the
American public about Barack Obama’s campaign is that he, for the first time in quite
a long time in presidential politics, was actually speaking in a way that resonated to
people’s hunger for moral and even spiritual discourse and bringing it to bear on
politics in public life.

SUE LAWLEY: What about Daniel Hermel, a student?
13

HERMEL: If one of the purposes of politics is to confer recognition upon civic and
moral virtue, does that mean that we should choose our politicians based on their
personal moral virtues such as their fidelity to their spouses and their qualities as good
parents, as well as choosing politicians based on their substantive policy proposals?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I would say that the character of politicians is relevant if we
think part of the purpose of politics is educative. Now whether the aspect of character
most relevant to political education and judgement has to do with marital behaviour,
I’m not so sure because character is a complicated thing. We have learned looking at a
wide range of politically capable miscreants (LAUGHTER) and policy positions
alone, I agree, are not a sufficient condition for choosing a good leader or an effective
leader.

SUE LAWLEY: Julian Savulescu, who’s Professor of Practical Ethics.

SAVULESCU: Thanks, Michael. I want to put pressure on your claim that we should
give a place to religious moralities and values. Now many values are shared by both
religious and non-religious people. So the value of love, family, well-being,
happiness, longevity - these are all values that can be defended in secular and
religious terms - but when those values have a distinctively religious basis, I don’t
believe they have any role in public life. So to take your example of same sex
marriage, you picked out the two values of a loving commitment or the value of
procreation. Both of those are widely defensible across society, but notice in no place
in the judgement was there appeal to particular religious authorities or religious
moralities. So nobody said that homosexuality was a perversion or unnatural or
against the dictates of some religion. So can you clarify the role of religious values in
public discourse?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well, first, the idea that we should only admit those
arguments that everyone can agree with or everyone can find to be reasonable, I think
that’s not something we can know or specify in advance. The moral of the story is we
can’t know in advance what the moral source of a good argument can be, and we may
learn from arguments that come from surprising sources. And so I’m arguing for a
14

politics that remains open and hospitable to a range of moral sources, be they based in
faith or in secular ideologies or reason.

SUE LAWLEY: Right, we’re going to leave that issue there. I’m going to go … Well
I think this is a change of issue. Just in front here.

HELM: My name’s Dieter Helm and I’m an economist at Oxford. I was struck by
two parts of your argument. The first part about morality and politics coming
together, which I find not at all difficult. But take a subject which is burningly
political and moral: climate change. If I ask myself what’s the moral question to
which climate change policy is an answer, I can talk about intergenerational equity,
about neutrality, and that’s enough. I don’t need Aristotle or the good life to engage in
a moral debate about politics. So can I have the first bit, the morality and the politics,
and the conventional discussion of neutrality and intergenerational equity and so on
without having to buy your Aristotelian ethics on top?

SUE LAWLEY: Briefly if you would, Michael.

MICHAEL SANDEL: I’m afraid you can’t, for the following reason. That … Take
climate change. Yes, there are conventional arguments about intergenerational justice.
Let me grant you that. Really to deal with the problem of the politics that will deal
ultimately with climate change will be a politics, I suspect, that changes the wanton
and profligate attitudes we have toward the natural world and toward the environment
as well as toward future generations’ enjoyment of it. I have a hunch - and this is only
a hunch - about the way politics in democratic societies play themselves out, and I
suppose it’s also a hunch about how important, eventful movements of social and
political reform take place. They take place when people are persuaded by their
circumstance and by the arguments and debates they hear around them, about the need
to question and change their attitudes and their ways of life. And I think that the
politics of the environment, maybe more clearly than any other politics we confront
today, requires a more ambitious engagement with what the good life is and how we
should regard our relation to the planet we share.

15

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, thank you very much indeed. My thanks also to all of you.
Next week we’ll be broadcasting from the Centre for Life in Newcastle where
Michael will be talking about genetics and morals - the issues surrounding designer
babies, designer athletes and so-called smart pills, which could bring about even
designer students. Can we, should we check our impulses to achieve such
“perfection”? That’s the same time next week. For now, from Oxford, Michael
Sandel, Reith Lecturer 2009, thank you very much indeed. Thank you.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you, Sue.

(APPLAUSE)

16

