THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS
TAKEN FROM A PROGRAMME AS IT WAS BROADCAST.
THE
NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC
NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE
ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.

REITH LECTURES 2009: A NEW CITIZENSHIP
Presenter: Professor Michael Sandel
Lecture 1: Markets and Morals
TRANSMISSION: 9th JUNE 2009
RADIO 4

9.00-9.45

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to the Radio Theatre in Broadcasting House for
the first in this year’s series of Reith Lectures. Their title is ‘A New Citizenship’,
addressing the prospect of a new politics for the common good. There could probably
be no better time to tackle such a challenging subject. In America, a new President,
very different from his predecessor, is trying to give new direction to a country that
many people feel had begun to flounder beneath the complexities it faces. In Europe,
the financial crisis, tinged in Britain by recent revelations of parliamentary
misbehaviour, has felt as though it might undermine the whole structure of
government.

This year’s lecturer believes we need to think afresh about what we mean by ‘the
common good’; to think about whether we need to foster deeper moral and spiritual
values in our public life. Our social, sexual, economic and scientific freedoms throw
up many difficult ethical questions. How, he asks, should we develop the moral
systems we need to cope with them? He’s one of today’s most eminent philosophers
and political thinkers. His course on justice at Harvard University is one of the most
oversubscribed in the history of the place. And his books have received worldwide
acclaim. So I ask you, please, ladies and gentlemen, to welcome the BBC Reith
Lecturer for 2009: Michael Sandel.

(APPLAUSE)

1

SUE LAWLEY: Welcome, Michael. First, and most importantly of all, I gather you
have been the inspiration for a character in The Simpsons?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Have you checked for sure, Sue? You know that it’s true?

SUE LAWLEY: (over) I’ve checked for sure, and I know it’s one of the nastiest,
most unjust, amoral characters called Montgomery Burns. Is that right?
(LAUGHTER)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you for pointing that out. (LAUGHTER) What a great
way to begin. This is …

SUE LAWLEY: (over) But why you?

MICHAEL SANDEL: This is urban legend. Its rumours among the students. But it
is true that a lot of the writers for The Simpsons went to Harvard. Many of them took
the course. So if they took liberties with their professors - or this one - maybe that’s
how it happened.

SUE LAWLEY: That’s how you ended up in there. But 15,000 students have taken
your course over the past 30 years at Harvard. I mean it’s difficult to ask you to
answer this without you know sounding immodest, but why do you think a course on
justice has been so popular, is so popular?

MICHAEL SANDEL: It’s a chance for students not just to read what philosophers in
the history of ideas said, but to challenge their own ideas about morality and politics
and justice. There’s something dangerous in that, but also exhilarating, and I think
that’s at the heart of the appeal.

SUE LAWLEY: But you’ve told me that you might have been a journalist, you
might have been a politician. You were thinking about, as you were becoming an
academic, of studying Economics further; and then you decided, you decided it was
2

“a spurious science”. Your words. Why?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Economics.

SUE LAWLEY: Why, why?

MICHAEL SANDEL: It’s a spurious science in so far as it is used to tell us what we
ought to do because questions of what we ought to do in politics or as a society are
unavoidably moral and political, not merely economic questions, and so they require
democratic debate about fundamental values. Economists can inform us about
possible implications of policy choices, but they can’t tell us - and they don’t really
claim to tell us - what’s right and wrong, what’s just and unjust. So I decided to veer
into that line of work.

SUE LAWLEY: But we’re hoping that’s what you’re going to tell us during the
course of these lectures. Hence, your first salvo: markets and morality. Michael, can I
invite you to deliver Lecture number one? Thank you.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well, I’ll give it a try.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well thank you, thank you very much. Thanks to you, Sue,
and what a great pleasure and honour it is to be here. The Reith Lectures have a
storied tradition of bringing together the world of ideas and the public realm, and so
it’s really a great privilege to join you in this tradition.

We live in a time of financial crisis and economic hardship - everybody knows that but we also live in a time of great hope for moral and civic renewal. We saw this hope
in the election of Barack Obama as President of the United States. In many
democracies around the world, there’s a similar hope, a restless impatience with
politics as it is. In Britain, the public has been outraged by revelations that Members
3

of Parliament have claimed reimbursement for inappropriate housing expenses.
Whatever reforms may emerge, one thing is clear: the better kind of politics we need
is a politics oriented less to the pursuit of individual self-interest and more to the
pursuit of the common good. That at least is the case I shall try to make in these
lectures.

A new politics of the common good isn’t only about finding more scrupulous
politicians. It also requires a more demanding idea of what it means to be a citizen,
and it requires a more robust public discourse - one that engages more directly with
moral and even spiritual questions. And so in the course of these lectures, I’ll explore
the prospect of a new citizenship and I’ll be asking what a more morally engaged
public life might be like.

If we’re to reinvigorate public discourse, if we’re to focus on big questions that
matter, questions of moral significance, one of the first subjects we need to address is
the role of markets, and in particular the moral limits of markets. Which brings me to
the topic of this first lecture. We’re living with the economic fallout of the financial
crisis and we’re struggling to make sense of it. One way of understanding what’s
happened is to see that we’re at the end of an era, an era of market triumphalism. The
last three decades were a heady, reckless time of market mania and deregulation. We
had the free market fundamentalism of the Reagan-Thatcher years and then we had
the market friendly Neo-Liberalism of the Clinton and Blair years, which moderated
but also consolidated the faith that markets are the primary mechanism for achieving
the public good. Today that faith is in doubt. Market triumphalism has given way to a
new market scepticism. Almost everybody agrees that we need to improve regulation,
but this moment is about more than devising new regulations. It’s also a time, or so it
seems to me, to rethink the role of markets in achieving the public good. There’s now
a widespread sense that markets have become detached from fundamental values, that
we need to reconnect markets and values. But how? Well it depends on what you
think has gone wrong. Some say the problem is greed, which led to irresponsible risk
taking. If this is right, the challenge is to rein in greed, to shore up values of
responsibility and trust, integrity and fair dealing; to appeal, in short, to personal
virtues as a remedy to market values run amuck.
4

We might call this diagnosis ‘the greed critique’. But the greed critique is flawed or,
at best, partial. Markets have always run on self-interest. From the standpoint of
economics, there is no real difference between self-interest and greed. Greed is a vice
in personal relations, but the whole point of markets is to turn this vice into an
instrument of the public good. This is the moral alchemy that markets are said to
perform. We learn this from Adam Smith who said, “It is not from the benevolence of
the butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to
their own self-interest”. “We address ourselves not to their humanity”, Smith said,
“but to their self-love. Nobody but a beggar chooses to depend chiefly upon the
benevolence of his fellow citizens”. This was Adam Smith. So it’s tempting to say
that all we need to do is rein in greed and restore integrity among bankers and
business executives and politicians, but this response is mainly hortatory: comforting
for a time, but not really much help in rethinking the role that markets play in our
societies. So what’s the alternative? The alternative is to re-think the reach of markets
into spheres of life where they don’t belong. We need a public debate about what it
means to keep markets in their place. And to have this debate, we have to think
through the moral limits of markets. We need to recognise that there are some things
that money can’t buy and other things that money can buy but shouldn’t.

Looking back over three decades of market triumphalism, the most fateful change was
not an increase in the incidence of greed. It was the expansion of markets and of
market values into spheres of life traditionally governed by non-market norms. We’ve
seen, for example, the proliferation of for profit schools, hospitals and prisons; the
outsourcing of war to private military contractors. We’ve seen the eclipse of public
police forces by private security firms, especially in the US and the UK where the
number of private guards is more than twice the number of public police officers. Or
consider the aggressive marketing of prescription drugs to consumers in the United
States. If you’ve ever seen the television commercials in America on the evening
news, you could be forgiven for thinking that the greatest health crisis in the world is
not malaria or river blindness or sleeping sickness, but a rampant epidemic of erectile
dysfunction. (LAUGHTER) Or consider some recent proposals to use market
incentives to solve social problems. Some New York City schools are trying to
improve academic performance by paying children 50 dollars if they get good scores
5

on standardised tests. In Dallas, they’re trying to encourage reading by paying
children 2 dollars for each book they read.

Or consider the vexed issue of immigration policy. Gary Becker, the Nobel Prize
winning free market economist at the University of Chicago, has a solution: to resolve
the contentious debate over whom to admit, the US, he says, should simply set a price
and sell American citizenship for 50,000 dollars, or perhaps 100,000. Immigrants
willing to pay a large entrance fee, Becker reasons, would automatically have
desirable characteristics. (LAUGHTER) They are likely to be young, skilled,
ambitious, hardworking; and, better still, unlikely to make use of welfare or
unemployment benefits. (LAUGHTER) Becker also suggests that charging admission
would make it easier to decide which refugees to accept - namely those sufficiently
motivated to pay the price. Now you might say that asking a refugee fleeing
persecution to hand over 50,000 dollars is callous. So consider another market
proposal to solve the refugee problem, one that doesn’t make the refugees themselves
pay out of their own pockets. An American law professor proposed the following: that
an international body assign each country a yearly refugee quota based on national
wealth. Then let nations buy and sell these obligations among themselves. So, for
example, if Japan is allocated 20,000 refugees per year but doesn’t want to take them,
it could pay Poland or Uganda to take them in. According to standard market logic,
everyone benefits: Poland or Uganda gains a new source of national income; Japan
meets its refugee obligations by outsourcing them; and more refugees are rescued than
would otherwise find asylum. What could be better?

There is something distasteful about a market in refugees, even if it’s for their own
good, but what exactly is objectionable about it? It has something to do with the fact
that a market in refugees changes our view of who refugees are and how they should
be treated. It encourages the participants - the buyers, the sellers and also those whose
asylum is being haggled over - to think of refugees as burdens to be unloaded or as
revenue sources rather than as human beings in peril. What this worry shows is that
markets are not mere mechanisms. They embody certain norms. They presuppose, and
also promote, certain ways of valuing the goods being exchanged. Economists often
assume that markets are inert, that they do not touch or taint the goods they regulate.
6

But this is a mistake. Markets leave their mark. Often market incentives erode or
crowd out non-market incentives.

Let’s go back to the case of cash for kids who make good test scores. Why hesitate to
pay a child for getting good marks or for reading a book? The goal, after all, is to
motivate the child to study or to read, and the payment is an incentive to promote that
end. Economics teaches that people respond to incentives, and while some children
may be motivated to read books for the love of learning, others may not. So why not
use money to add a further incentive? Economic reasoning would suggest that two
incentives work better than one, but it could turn out that the monetary incentive
undermines the intrinsic one, leading to less reading rather than more, or to more
reading in the short-run but for the wrong reason. On this scenario, the market is an
instrument but not an innocent instrument. What begins as a market mechanism
becomes a market norm. The obvious worry is that the payment may habituate
children to think of reading books as a way of making money, and so erode or crowd
out or corrupt the intrinsic good of reading.

A study of some Israeli childcare centres offers a good real world example of how
market incentives can crowd out non-market norms. The centres faced a familiar
problem - parents sometimes came late to pick up their children, and so a teacher had
to stay with the children until the tardy parents arrived. To solve this problem, the
childcare centres imposed a fine for late pick-ups. What do you suppose happened?
Late pick-ups actually increased. Now if you assume that people respond to
incentives, this is puzzling. You would expect, wouldn’t you, the fine to reduce, not
increase the incidence of late pick-ups? So what happened? Introducing the fine
changed the norms. Before, parents who came late felt guilty; they were imposing an
inconvenience on the teachers. Now parents considered a late arrival a service for
which they were willing to pay. Rather than imposing on the teacher, they were
simply paying her to stay longer.

Part of the problem here is that the parents treated the fine as a fee. It’s worth
pondering the distinction. Fines register moral disapproval, whereas fees are simply
prices that imply no moral judgement. When we impose a fine for littering, we’re
7

saying that littering is wrong. Tossing a beer can into the Grand Canyon not only
imposes clean-up costs; it reflects a bad attitude that we want to discourage. Suppose
the fine is 100 dollars and a wealthy hiker decides it’s worth the convenience. He
treats the fine as a fee and tosses his beer can into the Grand Canyon. Even if he pays
up, we consider that he’s done something wrong. By treating the Grand Canyon as an
expensive dumpster, he’s failed to appreciate it in an appropriate way.

Now the distinction between a fine and a fee is relevant to the debate over how to
reduce greenhouse gases and carbon emissions. Should government set limits on
emissions and fine companies that exceed them? Or should government create
tradable pollution permits? The second approach says in effect that emitting pollution
is not like littering; it’s simply a cost of doing business. But is that right, or should
some moral stigma attach to companies that spew pollutants into the air? To decide
this question, we have to do more than simply calculate costs and benefits. We have
to decide what attitudes toward the environment we want to encourage.

At the Kyoto conference on global warming in 1997, the United States insisted that
any mandatory emission standards would have to include a trading scheme, allowing
countries to buy and sell the right to pollute. So, for example, the US could fulfill its
obligations either by reducing its own greenhouse gas emissions, or by paying to
reduce some other countries’ emissions. Rather than tax gas-guzzling Hummers at
home, it could pay to restore an Amazonian rainforest or modernise an old
coal-burning factory in a developing country.

At the time, I wrote an opinion piece in the New York Times arguing against the
trading scheme. I worried that letting countries buy the right to pollute would be like
letting people pay to litter. We should try to strengthen, not weaken the moral stigma
attached to despoiling the environment, I thought. I also worried that if rich countries
could buy their way out of the duty to reduce their own emissions, we would
undermine the sense of shared sacrifice necessary to future global cooperation on the
environment.

After my piece ran, The Times was flooded with scathing letters - mostly from
8

economists (LAUGHTER), some from my own university. I utterly failed to
understand the virtue of markets, they said, or the efficiencies of trade, or even the
most elementary principles of economic rationality. Amidst the torrent of criticism, I
did receive a sympathetic email from my old college Economics Professor. He
understood the point I was trying to make, he wrote, but could he ask a small favour:
would I mind not publicly revealing the identity of the person who had taught me
Economics? (LAUGHTER)

I’ve since reconsidered my views about emissions trading to some extent, but I
continue to think that in addressing this question most economists miss the crucial
point: norms matter. In deciding how best to get global action on climate change, we
have to cultivate a new environmental ethic, a new set of attitudes toward the planet
we share. We’re unlikely to foster the global cooperation we need if some countries
are able to buy their way out of meaningful reductions in their own energy use.

Perhaps the best-known example of market norms eroding or crowding out
non-market norms involves the case of blood donation. The sociologist Richard
Titmuss compared the United States system, which permitted the buying and selling
of blood for transfusion, with the system in the UK which banned financial incentives
and relied wholly on donated blood. Titmuss found that rather than improve the
quality and supply of blood, the commercialisation of blood led to shortages,
inefficiencies and a greater incidence of contaminated blood. His explanation: putting
a price on blood turned what had been a gift into a commodity. It changed the norms
associated with blood donation. Once blood is bought and sold in the market, people
are less likely to feel a moral obligation to give it out of altruism.

The late pick-ups at childcare centres and the bad blood brought about by the use of
market incentives are cautionary tales. They remind us that markets leave their mark
on social norms. This does not by itself establish that marketising goods always
changes norms for the worse. To decide where the market belongs and where it
should be kept at a distance, we have to decide how goods and social practices are
properly valued. How to think about this will be the subject of my next lecture.

9

My general point is this. Some of the good things in life are corrupted or degraded if
turned into commodities, so to decide when to use markets, it’s not enough to think
about efficiency; we have also to decide how to value the goods in question. Health,
education, national defence, criminal justice, environmental protection and so on these are moral and political questions, not merely economic ones. To decide them
democratically, we have to debate case by case the moral meaning of these goods in
the proper way of valuing. This is the debate we didn’t have during the age of market
triumphalism. As a result, without quite realising it, without ever deciding to do so,
we drifted from having a market economy to being a market society. The hope for
moral and civic renewal depends on having that debate now. It is not a debate that is
likely to produce quick or easy agreement. To argue about the right way of valuing
goods is to bring moral and even spiritual questions into public discourse. Is it
possible to bring moral and religious disagreements into public life without
descending into intolerance and coercion? That is the question I’ll turn to in the next
lecture. Thank you very much.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael Sandel, thank you very much indeed. Now I want to open
up the subject to the floor and invite questions from the audience. Would you like to
ask a question, sir?

OLIVER KAMM: My name is Oliver Kamm. I’m a leader writer for The Times. Is
it not simply a more pragmatic way of approaching debates over market provision to
ask the question of efficiency? Both food and the provision of medical care are
essential to public health, yet we distribute these goods differently - food by the
market and health care in the UK by public provision regardless of ability to pay.

MICHAEL SANDEL: I don’t think that efficiency is the only thing that we take into
account even in the two cases that you mention. In the case of food, we do in most
welfare societies have provision that those who are without means and who would
otherwise go hungry should be provided some form of subsidy or support for food.
That’s a moral decision. It’s true there are more externalities perhaps in the case of
10

public health, but there are lots of ways of trying to sequester or cabin the public
health effects of ill health that wouldn’t require a full-scale commitment to provide
for the basic health of all citizens.

SUE LAWLEY: Do you want to come back quickly on that?

OLIVER KAMM: My point is that moral values are incommensurable. They are not
necessarily judged on the same scale. Arguments about efficiency are easier to come
by and, thus, easier to come to a social consensus about.

SUE LAWLEY: What would have happened in your example of blood donation,
which you say was counterproductive; you know the market mechanism worked
against it?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Right.

SUE LAWLEY: What would have happened if the market mechanism had improved
the supply of blood?

MICHAEL SANDEL: If it turned out that commercialised blood was a more
efficient system, then you would have a straightforward moral choice to make: do you
sacrifice some efficiency for the sake of preserving a certain value? The refugees case
brings this out most starkly because the way of testing this idea is to say suppose it
were true? Suppose it actually found more homes for more refugees than muddling
along the way we do it now? Would you be willing to do it? Even if we decided, Sue,
to do it, we should do it fully acknowledging that we’ve made a devil’s bargain. Or
we may decide the other way, that the devil’s bargain isn’t worth taking.

SUE LAWLEY: (over) What does our audience think of that?

OWEN …………: Yeah hi, my name is ………………, a citizen of Great Britain.
My question would be that Australia tried that policy where they paid the Pacific
11

Islands to take refugees that they weren’t prepared to take themselves.

MICHAEL SANDEL: How did it work out? Do you know?

OWEN ………….: Well it worked out very well for Australians. (LAUGHTER) But
not so sure for the refugees though.

MICHAEL SANDEL: There are two questions to be asked of that policy. One is,
how was it for the refugees and did their treatment reflect having been turned into
objects or commodities? And the broader question would be what would be the longer
term effect on the public culture and on the norms surrounding refugee policy more
generally?

SUE LAWLEY: What’s your answer on the refugee issue?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Prima facie, I find it appalling. But if some experiment were
done of this kind, then I would want not only to count the number of refugees who
were given asylum under the new policy as against the old. I would also want to know
more about the public culture in the societies that received the refugees, that refused
to receive the refugees, the attitude toward immigrants, the quality of life and the
self-esteem of the refugees and of immigrants. Those are among the things that I
would want to look at.

SUE LAWLEY: We’ve got a hedge fund manager here, Hugh Hendry. Where is he?

HUGH HENDRY: Michael, hi. Clearly I welcomed your comments in dismissing
the greed of critique. I think you were concluding to say greed is good. Now if that’s
the case …

SUE LAWLEY: Were you saying greed is good?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I was saying if greed is useful, let’s use it provided we can
12

very carefully keep it in its place, and we’ve not done a very good job of doing that
lately.

SUE LAWLEY: Okay, Mr Hendry?

HUGH HENDRY: So greed is good then. Erm … (LAUGHTER)

MICHAEL SANDEL: (LAUGHS) Not exactly, but …

HUGH HENDRY: I want to put to you: if my presumption that greed is good, is
altruism bad? And I say that in the context of the capitalism which is under fire today.
The reviled bankers of today, their mistake is that they showed no prejudice. You
could have no job, no income, no assets, and bankers said yes. We had a generation of
bankers that were benevolent, and that’s why we have the losses of today.
(LAUGHTER/AUDIENCE REACTION)

MICHAEL SANDEL: I don’t think so, I don’t quite agree.

SUE LAWLEY: The bankers of the last few years have been highly moral and
deeply altruistic then?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes. Now to say that they gave loans to people who wouldn’t
normally or properly qualify for the loans may be true enough, but to conclude
therefore that they were acting benevolently (APPLAUSE) I think is rather a threat.
What they were doing, the reason they were doing that - and you know this better than
I do - the reason they were doing that was not out of some sudden benevolence or
altruism. It was because they knew they would not have to hold those mortgages.
They could bundle them, chop them up into very small pieces, sell them off to other
people and never have to bear the consequences. It was that, not benevolence, and
surely you know that.

SUE LAWLEY: But why do you think there is a need to do any of this? I mean the
13

implication is that you think we have, for want of a better phrase, lost our moral
compass.

MICHAEL SANDEL: The public life of democratic societies is not going all that
well and there is a tremendous frustration - a frustration with politics and with
politicians - and the debates we have in public life are really not about the things that
matter most.

SUE LAWLEY: And why is that because we used to have such debates? Why are
you suggesting that is?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think it has partly to do with the momentum and the appeal
of markets and the promise of delivering the goods, which was intoxicating over the
three decades …

SUE LAWLEY: (under) Sure.

MICHAEL SANDEL: … when markets were triumphant and largely un-criticised. I
think that’s part of it. Another is a worry that’s been voiced in some of the questions
here. If we try explicitly to engage in public debate with hard, contested moral issues,
we’re going to have disagreement. Democracy is not neat and systematic. It’s messy,
it’s contentious, it’s argumentative - at its best.

SUE LAWLEY: Talking about looking back across the past few decades and how
we’ve arrived here, sitting here is Shirley Williams, Baroness Williams, who of
course has been a very active politician during all of that time. Your point?

BARONESS WILLIAMS: Let me roll back for a minute in history, back to the 18th
century. You have largely private police. The Peelers didn’t come in until 1840. All
schools were either charitable or private independent schools which were fee-paying.
Most health was in the same category. The public service isn’t a concept that means
very much. Now the Victorians in Britain and Bismarck’s groups in Germany
14

produced the concept, I think, in the modern sense of public service; and in doing so,
they underpinned societies. The question I want to ask, therefore, is this: do you think
there’s any chance of creating what one might call the underpinning of democratic
societies without having the sense of public service revived? And, if so, does that
imply that you would only get the kind of balanced society you want to see by
essentially regarding all markets as being subject in the end to ethical principles?

SUE LAWLEY: Would you want a re-moralised politics?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I do. My answer, Shirley, is yes I do want all markets to be
answerable to ethical principles and to principles of social justice.

BARONESS WILLIAMS: Well I think what we’re looking at is the dissolution of
professional ethical standards. Bankers used to be thoughtful grandfathers who told
you you couldn’t afford this kind of thing. They aren’t anymore. Politicians used to be
people that you thought would look after our interests. Now nobody thinks they do.
And so it goes. It’s the micro professional ethics as well as the societal ethics that
seem to me to have begun to disappear.

SUE LAWLEY: But that is an ambition to put the genie back in the bottle, isn’t it
Michael?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Are we sure, Sue? I would like to add one other resource. It
has something to do with the project of building a common life, of shared citizenship.
A lot of our public institutions - public libraries, public transportation, public parks
and recreation centres - are only partly for the sake of looking after those who
couldn’t afford those services left on their own. They are also traditionally sites for
the cultivation of a common citizenship, so that people from different walks of life
encounter one another and so acquire enough of a shared … sense of a shared life that
we can meaningfully think of one another as citizens in a common venture.

SUE LAWLEY: I see sitting over there David Willetts MP, Shadow Innovation,
Universities and Skills. Mr Willetts, your question?
15

WILLETTS: I just wanted to come back to your argument about this moral
framework that we should judge everything by because for me, personally, I think
where we’re failing is properly valuing the future - properly valuing the interests of
our children and grandchildren and the sustainability of the way we live. But you can
actually capture that in an economic argument that we’re not properly putting a price
and a cost on the environmental degradation or the exploitation of future generations;
and I wonder if that, even if it sounds less noble, isn’t actually the best way of
winning the argument?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Why do you want or should we want to price the environment
in a way that takes account of the interests of future generations, people we will never
know? I think there’s no good answer to that question that doesn’t draw on some
notion of intergenerational justice. So the price mechanism there, as I hear it, is
precisely in the service of a certain conception of justice that’s been missing from
current policy. Would you disagree with that?

DAVID WILLETTS: I accept that there is a moral framework to markets, but I think
you have to recognise the power of the market is one of the most effective ways
we’ve got of measuring the use of resources and putting a value on them.

SUE LAWLEY: We’ve got somewhere here the Secretary of State. Where is he? Ed
Miliband, where are you? Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change. Where
is he? Oh there he is. I’m sure you might care to comment?

ED MILIBAND: What I find in my work is that lots and lots of people in the private
sector want companies that live by their values, and their values go far beyond market
values. But I wondered if you’d comment on people in this because I think people
have a yearning for the kinds of things you’re talking about and we see it in people in
the private sector and in the public sector and elsewhere?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think that vis-à-vis the economists and the economistic
thinkers I’m criticising, I’m more optimistic about human nature than they are in the
following respect. Altruism, civic spirit, benevolence, fellow feeling - there is not a
16

fixed supply of these sentiments. To the contrary. I think those moral sentiments are
less like scarce resources that are drawn down with use than like muscles that are
increased and strengthened with exercise. And that’s a fundamental difference, I
think, between the way I view the moral psychology of markets and the way most
defenders of economic reasoning do.

SUE LAWLEY: It’s a wonderfully reassuring thought. I’m going to take just a
couple of quick questions because we’re coming to the end of our time now. Woman
in red in the middle there.

NICOLE MARTIN: Nicole Martin. I’m a student. There’s been all this talk about
spheres of life where markets shouldn’t be and markets are separate from morality.
Here’s another view. Markets aren’t just a mechanism which we can judge in virtue of
their consequences. They’re how we should do morality in the first place. In a free
market, nobody’s coerced and we’re held responsible for our decisions. Even in a
hypothetical situation where everybody had a decent standard of living and we all had
roughly equal resources to begin with, I still think there would be something
objectionable with treating markets as we do morality?

MICHAEL SANDEL: If we had a perfectly equal society, would my objections to
markets fall away? Is that what you’re asking?

NICOLE MARTIN: Yes. (LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: Are you sure?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Go ahead! If I’ve got it wrong …

NICOLE MARTIN: Well, yeah, that’s basically my question. If we had a perfectly
equal society, do you think there’s anything more to morality than just markets …?

MICHAEL SANDEL: (over) Yes, yes I do.
17

NICOLE MARTIN: … and people making decisions between each other?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes. Even in an equal society, equality and distributive
justice and fairness are very important values, but they are not the only values.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m not going to come back because we’re pressed on time. I’ve got
one more question - what we call in cricket a googly - but I’ll tell you what that is in a
minute.

MICHAEL SANDEL: (over) Does that mean an easy question?

SUE LAWLEY: No, it means the opposite. (LAUGHTER) No, it doesn’t come from
me. It comes from someone called Roz. Where is Roz? Has she deserted us? It says
Roz here - R.O.Z. There is no Roz. They now think it’s Rod and it’s a man at the
back! (LAUGHTER) Man at the back called Rod - for heaven’s sake, stand up. He’s
chickened out. Okay, how immoral of him. Let me put this to you. ‘Love has become
a major market nowadays. Valentine’s Day, dating sites and the controversial market
in foreign brides are helping people and contributing to their finding somebody. If
love is not out of bounds, how do we decide what is?’ (LAUGHTER)

MICHAEL SANDEL: It’s an interesting question (LAUGHTER) whether it’s
possible - never mind moral - whether it’s possible if you’re friendless to buy a friend.
And we’ve been talking in this lecture and discussion about things that arguably
money should not buy. What this question about love raises is whether there are some
things that money can’t possibly buy.

SUE LAWLEY: Money can’t buy me love.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Maybe. But actually the distinction between the question of
what money can’t buy (like maybe love) and what money shouldn’t buy (like maybe
kidneys for transplantation) is actually a subject that intrigues me a lot because I think
they’re connected. And believe it or not, Sue, I’m going to try to take that up in the
18

next lecture. (LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, thank you very much indeed. Thank you to you all. Next
week we’ll be in Oxford where Professor Sandel was a Balliol man back in the
mid-70s, and there he’ll be discussing morality in politics. I hope you’ll tune in then.
For now, Michael Sandel, Reith Lecturer 2009, thank you very much indeed. Thank
you.

(APPLAUSE)

19

