THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS
TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME AS IT WAS BROADCAST. THE
NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC
NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE
ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.

REITH LECTURES 2009: A NEW CITIZENSHIP
Presenter: Professor Michael Sandel
Lecture 4: A New Politics of the Common Good
TRANSMISSION: 30th JUNE 2009
RADIO 4

9.00-9.45am

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to Washington D.C. Tonight, for the fourth and
last of this year’s BBC Reith Lectures, we’re in the capital of the United States at the
George Washington University.

Our subject, appropriately, is New Politics. Here in America, and in Britain too, the
phrase ‘New Politics’ is on everyone’s lips. Barack Obama is six months into his
historic presidency, and the world is watching and waiting to see what changes to the
world’s problems his new approach will bring. In Britain, revelations of how MPs
spend public money to support their lifestyles has undermined the country’s
parliamentary system. Politicians in the public are calling for reform. It seems that the
time is right for - as the title of our lecture has it - a New Politics of the Common
Good. Ladies and gentlemen, will you please welcome the BBC Reith Lecturer for
2009: Professor Michael Sandel.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, you said at the outset of these lectures that you might have
been a politician, you might have been a political journalist. In fact, at the age of 21 some time ago now, well in fact we can date it - you were present at the impeachment
of Richard Nixon, were you not, in the role of the journalist. How come you were in
such a pole position at such a young age?

1

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well I was very interested in politics and in political
journalism and I was able, by sheer luck, to get an internship that summer in the
Washington bureau of the Houston Chronicle. I’m not from Houston. I hadn’t been
there, and I still have never been to Houston. (LAUGHTER) But this was Washington
in the summer of 1974 when the Supreme Court was hearing arguments over the
Nixon tapes and whether he would have to give them over, and when the House
Judiciary Committee was deliberating about the impeachment of Richard Nixon. It
was a dream come true.

SUE LAWLEY: Indeed. And you were in that room, 35 years ago next month, when
the vote was taken and he was impeached. Does the drama of that moment stay with
you?

MICHAEL SANDEL: It does. The room, I remember powerfully, was hushed when
they took that vote. It wasn’t quite the way it was later when they impeached Bill
Clinton when there was a partisan edge to it. There was a sense of constitutional
moment and the members, as they called the roll, their voices trembled as they gave
their votes - on both sides.

SUE LAWLEY: It’s difficult to understand then, when you experienced the thrill of
being absolutely at the heart of a story that was rocking the world, that you didn’t
carry on and become a journalist.

MICHAEL SANDEL: I was tempted, but at the end of the summer - and I was
hoping that the impeachment would take its course in the Senate - but I soon had to go
back to college, the term was about to begin, so I began hoping for a resignation,
which was the only way I would see it to completion. And Richard Nixon obliged me.
(LAUGHTER) He resigned just before I had to go back to college. At the end of the
summer, I was talking with my boss, the bureau chief, about what an experience this
had been. And he said - he was a man I suppose in his late 50s - he said that he was
thinking of retiring because there would never be a story like this again. So I asked
him, “Well you’re thinking of retiring because it will never be this good again. What
am I at age 21 supposed to think?” (LAUGHTER) I didn’t wind up going into
2

political journalism, but it was a fantastic summer.

SUE LAWLEY: And you didn’t wind up becoming a politician either. You became a
political philosopher. What would you say to people who said you took the easier
option; that it’s easier to be high-minded in theory than in practice?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think that being in elective politics, being a politician is an
extremely demanding job. And so for all of the shenanigans and misdeeds of
politicians, I do think that they are engaged in what potentially is a noble exercise and
they do, most of them, make great sacrifices to engage in it.

SUE LAWLEY: Well 35 years ago you were a cub reporter. We’re looking forward
to hearing what it is you’ve learned since then about politics and people. Michael, the
floor is yours.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well thank you, Sue, very much. It’s a great pleasure to be
here for this fourth Reith Lecture.

Over the course of these lectures, I’ve been arguing that we need to reframe the terms
of political argument in two ways. First, we need a public debate about the moral
limits of markets. And, second, we need a more robust public discourse - one that
engages more directly with moral and even spiritual questions.

In this lecture, I’ll try to connect these themes and show how they can form the
starting point for a new politics of the common good.

First, markets. For three decades, the governing philosophy of the United States and
Britain was defined by the faith that markets are the primary instrument for achieving
3

the public good. The financial crisis has put this faith in question.. The era of market
triumphalism has come to an end. But we have yet to find our way to a new governing
philosophy. Even President Obama has yet to articulate one.

One obstacle to a new public philosophy is a persisting assumption from the age of
market faith. It’s what I’d like to call “market mimicking governance.” It’s the idea
that the primary purpose of government is to correct what economists call “market
failure”.

It’s the idea that government should try to replicate the outcomes that competitive
markets would produce if all goods and resources were properly priced.

Consider environmental policy. If air and water are “free” - that is unpriced - then
companies and consumers will produce too much pollution. So government’s job is to
set regulations to correct for this market failure - through cap and trade, for example,
or a carbon tax.

To do this, the policymakers have to ask how much pollution is too much. And to
answer this question, they have to figure out what value to place on clean air, clean
water, and the resulting health benefits. Here’s where “market-mimicking
governance” comes into play. In order to make these calculations, regulators often use
“cost-benefit analysis”: they place a monetary value on the benefits of clean air and
water, compare them with the costs, and set regulations accordingly.

It sounds perfectly sensible. What’s wrong with comparing the costs and benefits of
government regulation? Nothing - if by comparing costs and benefits you simply
mean assessing the advantages and disadvantages of a given policy.

But cost-benefit analysis aspires to scientific rigour. It tries to assign a monetary value
to costs and benefits. It tries to mimic the market. And here’s where it goes wrong.
4

Many of the benefits of public policy involve values that can’t be captured in
monetary terms - most notably, the value of human life. Let me offer a few examples.

The first involves smoking. In the Czech Republic, many people smoke. Philip
Morris, the tobacco company, sells a lot of cigarettes there. Some years ago, the
Czech government considered raising taxes on cigarettes. Philip Morris wasn’t happy
about this. So the company commissioned a cost-benefit analysis of the effects of
smoking on the Czech national budget.

The study found that the government actually makes more money than it loses from
smoking. Although it’s true that smokers impose higher medical costs on the budget,
while they are alive, they die early and so save the government considerable sums in
pensions, housing, and healthcare for the elderly. (LAUGHTER) According to the
study, the so-called “positive effects” of smoking, once taken into account, lead to a
net gain to the Czech treasury of $147 million per year. So lung cancer, it turns out,
has its fiscal advantages.

Now you might say that the cost-benefit analysis, callous though it was, was simply
incomplete; it failed to calculate the cost - to the smokers - of their early and painful
demise. But how might such costs be calculated?

A few years ago, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency tried to do this. In
presenting a cost-benefit analysis of new air pollution standards, the agency assigned
a monetary value to human life: $3.7 million per life saved, except for people over the
age of 70 whose lives were valued at $2.3 million. Lying behind the different
valuations was a market-mimicking assumption: younger people, with more years still
to live, would presumably pay more to save their lives than older people would pay to
save theirs. Advocates for the elderly didn’t see it that way. They bitterly protested
the “senior citizen discount”. (LAUGHTER)

The difficulty of placing a monetary value on human life and other non-market goods
is one problem with cost-benefit analysis. Another is that monetising all costs and
benefits makes for a spurious science that shifts decision-making from democratic
5

politics to technocrats.

Consider cell phones: should it be illegal to talk on the phone while driving? A few
years ago, the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis did a cost-benefit analysis to find out.
It concluded that crashes caused by cell phone use while driving cost about $43
billion

per year in medical costs and loss of life. A sizeable sum. But the study

found, by strange coincidence, that the economic benefits of cell phone use while
driving also amounted to $43 billion, making it a break-even proposition.
(LAUGHTER)

But if you look at the assumptions behind the numbers, you find that they are hardly
scientific. The study assumes that cell phones cause 2600 deaths per year. But it
admits that the actual number of such deaths per year is somewhere between 800 and
8,000! So depending on which number you choose, the benefits of a ban on cell
phones while driving is either $9 billion or $193 billion per year! Or maybe
somewhere in between. So there’s nothing scientific to the conclusion that the costs
and benefits of cell phone use while driving are equal. The market-mimicking
calculus is no better than a hunch.

An even better example of the spurious science of cost-benefit analysis is one offered
by Richard Posner, a prominent U.S. legal scholar and judge and the founder of the
law and economics movement. Posner analysed the costs and benefits of a powerful
particle accelerator built at Brookhaven, Long Island, a federal research facility. He
wanted to weigh the benefits of the research against the very slight but rather alarming
risk that the particle accelerator would destroy the earth. Posner estimated the value of
the research to be $250 million per year, and the risk that the thing would destroy the
earth to be one in ten million. To decide whether it was worth it, he assigned a
monetary value to the potential extinction of the human race - (LAUGHTER) $600
trillion dollars. Doing the math, he calculated that the cost of the project outweighed
the benefit by $100 million. And so, he concluded, it shouldn’t be built.
(LAUGHTER)

Cost-benefit analysis is one instance of what I’m calling “market-mimicking
6

governance.” It’s objectionable on two grounds: First, it puts a price tag on goods including human life - whose value can’t be captured in monetary terms. Second, by
claiming to be a science of public choice, it elevates technocratic decision-making at
the expense of democratic deliberation.

But cost-benefit analysis is only one expression of market-mimicking governance.
Another is the broader idea that the primary purpose of government is to correct for
“market failure.” Economists have long recognised that markets don’t produce
efficient outcomes in certain circumstances: when economic activity produces
externalities (effects on third parties, such as pollution). Or when it would be
impossible for a private company to collect payment from everyone who uses a
service. These are classic market failures that require government intervention.

But the idea that correcting for market failure is the main rationale for government,
that idea has emerged only recently. It was the way that centre left parties, on the
defensive after the Reagan-Thatcher era, tried to restate the case for government. For
a time, it seemed to succeed - with New Labour in the U.K. and with Bill Clinton and
the New Democrats in the United States.

As a governing philosophy, however, the task of correcting market failures is too
humble and too narrow. Democratic governance is radically devalued if reduced to
the role of handmaiden to the market economy. Democracy is about more than fixing
and tweaking and nudging incentives to make markets work better.

The purpose of markets is to organise productive activity, so as to maximise consumer
welfare. But democratic governance is about much more than maximising GDP, or
satisfying consumer preferences. It’s also about seeking distributive justice;
promoting the health of democratic institutions; and cultivating the solidarity, and
sense of community, that democracy requires.

Market-mimicking governance - at its best - can satisfy us as consumers. But it can do
nothing to make us democratic citizens.

7

Why then have we drifted - on both sides of the Atlantic - away from older traditions
of solidarity and civic virtue and toward more market-oriented ways of conceiving
public life?

The answer does not lie simply in the market fundamentalism of the Reagan-Thatcher
years. Or in the heady economic times of the 1990s and the years before the crash.

Market-mimicking governance is appealing because it seems to offer a way of making
political choices without making hard and controversial moral choices. It seems to be
non-judgemental. So, for example, rather than engage in a morally charged debate
about the proper way of valuing the environment, or about the attitudes toward nature
we should try to cultivate - rather than do this, we try to set environmental policy by
working from people’s market preferences. So we ask people how much they would
pay to save the spotted owl; or we try to determine the monetary value people
implicitly place on their lives when they accept risky jobs. And then we crank the
dollar value of human life - or of spotted owls - into a cost-benefit analysis, and we do
the math.

Actually, we don’t do the math. Experts and technocrats do it for us. The
non-judgemental impulse is also an anti-democratic impulse. This brings me back to a
theme that has run through these lectures. The attempt to empty politics of moral
controversy may seem to be a way of respecting our differences, but it is actually
corrosive of democratic life.

The flight from moral judgement and moral argument in politics predates the era of
market triumphalism. It found expression - on both sides of the Atlantic - beginning in
the 1950s and 60s, partly as a reaction against fascist and communist ideologies, and
partly as an attempt to spare politics from becoming embroiled in religious strife. And
it also reflected a growing faith in economics as a value-neutral science.

Harold Macmillan expressed this sensibility when he said in 1963: “If people want a
sense of purpose, they should get it from their archbishop. They should certainly not
get it from their politicians.” And John F. Kennedy, a very different kind of politician,
8

articulated a similar sentiment: “Most of the problems that we now face”, Kennedy
said in 1962, “are technical problems, are administrative problems. They are very
sophisticated judgements which do not lend themselves to the great sort of ‘passionate
movements’ which have stirred this country so often in the past.”

Kennedy was referring to the economy, not to the Civil Rights Movement - a
passionate movement if ever there was one - in a powerful example of a
morally-contentious and spiritually-inspired form of politics.

The renunciation of moral and religious argument in politics, in the decades following
World War II, prepared the way for the market triumphalism of the past three
decades.

But times have changed. The financial crisis has discredited market triumphalism in
both its laissez-faire and Neoliberal versions. And the election of Barack Obama has
given powerful expression to the hunger for a public life of larger meaning that
engages more directly with moral and spiritual questions. All of which suggests that
the time may be right for a new kind of politics - a politics of the common good.

What might such a politics look like? Unlike market-driven politics, a politics of the
common good invites us to think of ourselves less as consumers, and more as citizens.
Here’s why this matters. Market-mimicking governance takes people’s preferences as
given and fixed. But when we deliberate as citizens, when we engage in democratic
argument, the whole point of the activity is critically to reflect on our preferences, to
question them, to challenge them, to enlarge them, to improve them.

Every successful movement of social or political reform has done more than change
the law. It has also changed attitudes and dispositions, what Tocqueville called the
“habits of the heart.”

Political leaders should bear this in mind when making the case for change. Consider
health. Britain was able to create a taxpayer financed National Health System because
of a widely shared sense of social solidarity that said access to health care should not
9

depend on a person’s ability to pay. The United States has not yet been able to
summon that solidarity. If President Obama succeeds in getting universal health care,
it will not only be because people conclude that the present system is too costly and
inefficient. It will happen if and when Americans are persuaded that providing for the
health of everyone is among the mutual responsibilities of citizenship.

Consider the environment. If the countries of the world are able to change patterns of
energy use and bring about a meaningful reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, it
will not be because emissions trading schemes allow countries to buy and sell the
right to pollute. Market mechanisms can be useful instruments. But real change will
depend on changing people’s attitudes toward nature, and rethinking our
responsibilities toward the planet we share. This is a moral and spiritual project, not
only an economic one.

Finally, consider an issue that doesn’t get much attention in our politics these days:
inequality. In the United States, as in most countries, the gap between rich and poor
deepened during the decades of market triumphalism. Inequalities of income and
wealth are now at levels not seen since the 1930s.

Politicians find it difficult to talk about inequality. Even Barack Obama’s modest
proposal to return income tax rates to where they stood in the 1990s prompted charges
during the campaign that he was a dangerous socialist who wanted to spread the
wealth. Part of the problem, I think, is that we tend to talk about inequality as if the
problem were how to redistribute access to private consumption. But the real problem
with inequality lies in the damage it does to the civic project, to the common good.

Here’s why. Too great a gap between rich and poor undermines the solidarity that
democratic citizenship requires. As inequality deepens, rich and poor live increasingly
separate lives. The affluent send their children to private schools (or to public schools,
as we call them in the United States) in wealthy suburbs, leaving urban public schools
to the children of families who have no alternative. A similar trend leads to the
withdrawal by the privileged from other public institutions and facilities. Private
health clubs replace municipal recreation centres and swimming pools. Affluent
10

residential communities hire private security guards and rely less on public police
protection. A second or third car removes the need to rely on public transportation.
And so on.

This trend has two bad effects: one fiscal, the other civic. First, public services
deteriorate as those who no longer use them become less willing to support them with
their taxes. Second, public institutions such as schools, parks, playgrounds and
community centres cease to be places where citizens from different walks of life
encounter one another. Institutions that once gathered people together and served as
informal schools of civic virtue have become few and far between. The hollowing out
of the public realm makes it difficult to cultivate the sense of community that
democratic citizenship requires.

So rather than focus on access to private consumption, a politics of the common good
would make the case for rebuilding the infrastructure of civic life; public schools to
which rich and poor alike would want to send their children; public transportation
systems reliable enough to attract commuters from all walks of life; public health
clinics, playgrounds, parks, recreation centres, libraries and museums that would,
ideally at least, draw people out of their gated communities and into the common
spaces of a shared democratic citizenship.

In the course of these lectures, I’ve argued for a greater role for a moral argument in
public life, and for the need to keep markets in their place. I would like to conclude by
anticipating one possible objection. The distinguished economist Kenneth Arrow once
wrote - and I quote: Like many economists, I do not want to rely too heavily on
substituting ethics for self-interest. I think it is best on the whole that the requirement
of ethical behaviour be confined to those circumstances where the price system breaks
down. We do not wish, he said, to use up recklessly the scarce resources of altruistic
motivation.

The notion that ethics, altruism and fellow-feeling are scarce resources, whose supply
is fixed once and for all and depleted with use, this idea seems to me outlandish outlandish but deeply influential. My aim in these lectures has been to call this idea
11

into question. I’ve tried to suggest that the virtues of democratic life - community,
solidarity, trust, civic friendship - these virtues are not like commodities that are
depleted with use. They are rather like muscles that develop and grow stronger with
exercise.

A politics of moral and civic renewal depends, it seems to me, on a more strenuous
exercise of these civic virtues. Thank you very much.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael Sandel, thank you very much indeed. I’m now going to
invite questions from the audience here at George Washington University. I want to
begin with a student here at the George Washington University. His name is Brandon
Heinz and he’s Chairman of the Republican Group.

BRANDSON HEINZ: You say we have a choice between being consumers and
citizens, and that now is the time for us to be citizens because free market
consumerism in your view has failed. Republicans believe this is a false choice. We
are always citizens because we believe in America and what it represents - free
market capitalism, the free exchange of ideas, and the freedom to choose your own
destiny. Why does the only solution lie in the hands of government intervention and
the invention of a state where more and more of its citizens rely on government?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well I’m tempted to put a question back to Brandon. Am I
allowed to do that?

SUE LAWLEY: You can do that.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Do you think, Brandon, that the freedom of the citizen is
realised in market relations, or do you think that it requires a stronger civic
engagement?

12

BRANDON HEINZ: I believe that the choice between being a consumer and a
citizen is a false choice. I think it’s both: you have to be a citizen but you’re also a
consumer, and you have that right to choose your own destiny as an entrepreneur or
whatever you choose to be in our system. And that’s what is different about every
other country on the face of the planet, in my opinion - is that you can come here with
nothing and you have the freedom to choose your own destiny and to go out and
pursue your dreams.

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think actually pursuing one’s dreams, that is a larger
freedom than merely consumerist or market freedom. I’m not sure I would agree that
only in the United States are people free to pursue their dreams. But I would say that
that way of describing your ideal of freedom does begin to take us to a larger moral
vision that may be not identical to the one that I’ve been proposing, but it does take
one important step away from the idea that all freedom consists in is the right to be a
consumer in the marketplace.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call in now Toby Harnden, if I may, just up there. He
is the U.S. Editor of the Daily Telegraph.

TOBY HARNDEN: The MP scandal in the UK has prompted a desire for a new kind
of politics, and I feel there’s the same desire here in the U.S. but also the same
widespread dissatisfaction with politicians. How do you change the politics without
changing the politicians? And if you can’t do that, how do you change the politicians?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think that you have to try to change both - so you need
reform to clean up the kind of corruption that your newspaper exposed in Britain, but
that’s not sufficient, I don’t think. If you cleaned up the system of expenses, that
would not be enough to answer the public desire for a kind of political argument and
debate that really addresses the things that they care about most. It wouldn’t. Which is
why one has also to attend to what I’ve here called the terms of political discourse, the
shape of the political agenda, the way we argue about politics.
13

SUE LAWLEY: I can see E.J. Dionne. He is of course the Washington Post
journalist and political commentator.

E.J DIONNE: Well I just want to come back by going to the part of your lecture
where you talked about the role of expertise.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Right.

E.J. DIONNE: And while it’s easy to make fun of cost-benefit analysis that involves
the destruction of the entire planet, I’d like you to talk about where is expertise
legitimately used in a democratic society and what is the role of experts to inform this
democratic choice?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think that in so far as experts exert influence and authority,
they have a responsibility and public institutions should encourage that the experts
themselves be participants in public deliberation about those questions. So that they’re
not just people in a back room cranking out cost-benefit analysis calculations, but that
the experts themselves - be they scientists or economists, whomever they may be join in a public debate, argument, and not only answer questions but address
challenges that may be put to them by their fellow citizens.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to move on. I’m going to call Stuart Butler.

STUART BUTLER: I direct research at an institution here called the Heritage
Foundation. My reaction to your lecture was while I agree very much with your
emphasis on solidarity, on the way we think about politics, I think you set up
somewhat of a straw man in suggesting that it’s sort of either that or markets, or that
we’ve gone through an era where markets in some way have pushed aside these other
important ways of looking at politics. Markets I think come into the picture more as a
tool, as a factor in how we think about these things. When we look at something like
education, markets enter the picture as an argument that in fact the public institutions
here have let down the very people they were supposed to serve and that we can use
forms of markets of choice, of empowerment with financial power to beef up these
14

institutions, to force them to do the job that they were supposed to do that they’ve not
been doing.

SUE LAWLEY: Okay. Michael, comment on that?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I certainly agree that markets can be effective mechanisms.
The challenge for democratic politics is to keep markets in their place. Where we may
disagree is in the estimation of the extent to which markets have reached beyond their
proper role over the last few decades. In the war in Iraq, to take one very conspicuous
example, by 2007 there were more private military contractors in Iraq than there were
U.S. military troops. Now that may or may not be a good thing. My point is we never
had a debate about whether we wanted to outsource war to private, paid military
contractors or not, and yet it happened. And that is fateful for the condition of a
democracy. We never had that debate.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to bring in Robin Sproul next. She is the Bureau Chief of
ABC News here in Washington.

ROBIN SPROUL: Thank you. Professor Sandel, since the 1960s American public
discourse has often been quite divisive - particularly over issues like abortion, same
sex marriage, evolution versus creationism - which has led us to this you’re with us or
you’re against us political mentality. And I’m curious how you think we can move
beyond some of those divides towards a more civil discourse, and do you think we
need to in this country?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I do think we need to, and I think the way to do it is actually
to be more willing to engage, to listen, and even to argue about the competing moral
and religious convictions that citizens bring to public life.

SUE LAWLEY: Where is Maeve Duggan? You’re a student here at George
Washington University.

15

MAEVE DUGGAN: My question is do you think that this attitude of politics for the
common good can really be reconciled with this economic crisis and
market-mimicking governance because really innovation comes not in times of
necessity but in times of peace when all of your basic needs are met?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Alright, it’s a really good question. I’m not sure I agree with
the last bit because sometimes political innovation and change can come about during
times of great pressing necessity. Think of FDR and the New Deal, for example. I do
think there does seem to be a lack of fit, or at least a tension, between the promise of
moral and civic renewal that so moved the country during the Obama campaign and
dealing with the financial crisis essentially by trying to give enticements and subsidies
to the same investment bankers who had gotten us into this mess. So I do think that
you are right to point to this way in which the treasury and the administration went
about trying to use private markets to solve a credit crisis, which may or may not
work.

SUE LAWLEY: We’ve moved back towards politics and we have, I see in our
audience here, Tom Friedman, the author and Pulitzer prize-winning journalist. Mr
Friedman, your question if you would?

TOM FRIEDMAN: In many ways, the Bill Clinton-Tony Blair Third Way
Neoliberal model was kind of Thatcherism-Reaganism lite, and by the previous
questioner one might wonder whether President Obama really is following that path.
Do you think he really is in the Clinton-Blair mould ultimately? And if he isn’t, what
would be the sign? What would his approach to this financial crisis look like, from
your point of view, if he were indeed a radical departure?

MICHAEL SANDEL: The jury is out on what the political identity of the Obama
presidency will ultimately be, and the handling of the financial crisis does give reason
for pause, hesitation, and even, I would say, some concern. So what would another
approach look like? Well some people say that nationalising the banks in the public
16

interest would have been a better, more frontal, and ultimately simpler, cleaner way of
doing it. It would have had one advantage, which would be to make explicit that the
purpose here is the public purpose and however we resolve the financial crisis, we
should do so in a way that minimises the unfair advantage to be enjoyed by bankers
and investors whose conduct of their companies got us into this mess in the first place.
And nationalising would at least send that message in a way that a complex,
public-private partnership involving yet more leverage doesn’t.

SUE LAWLEY: Tom Friedman?

TOM FRIEDMAN: Would you be ready to do that even if, just to be provocative,
the experts told you that the net result would be a poorer society with less risk taking?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Whether I would trust those experts would partly depend on
whether they, too, might not have been implicated in the deregulation that led to this
problem. (LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call Elliot Gerson.

ELLIOT GERSON: I wonder, Michael, what makes you think that market
triumphalism is dying or has passed some kind of inflection point? I wonder if we
really are seeing a change?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think we’re at a point where it could go either way, and
what lessons we learn from this experience will go a long way toward shaping the
political possibilities, including the possibility for a politics of the common good.
That’s the hope.

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, we talked just briefly earlier on about whether this was the
right moment, whether the moment was ripe for change. And maybe do you feel that
17

when people are uncomfortable and when the systems on which they have depended
for so long suddenly collapse underneath them, is this an idea that’s found its
moment?

MICHAEL SANDEL: We’ll have to see. I don’t think that the financial crisis by
itself is the primary source of hope for a more morally engaged public life. So much
of political leadership on this level is in the doing. In 1932, when he ran for President,
Franklin Roosevelt did not run on the platform of the New Deal. His platform was we
have to balance the budget.

SUE LAWLEY: But great leaders seize that moment. Great leaders corral a feeling
that’s coming from the public as a whole, don’t they? Whether it’s Churchill in the
Second World War, whether it was Lincoln after the Civil War, suddenly they are
actually reflecting - corralling that emotion and reflecting it and putting it into
operation. That’s really what you’re hoping, you’re saying, is happening today?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes. And they rearticulate their purposes in governing vision.
When the Civil War began, Lincoln’s purpose was to save the union. Only later, after
the enormous sacrifice at Gettysburg and elsewhere, did Lincoln redefine the purpose
of the Civil War, which was now freedom, not union. So great leaders, they have to
begin with a certain moral and political imagination and depth, but they deploy those
resources and that creativity by articulating as they go, by making sense to the public
the full measure of the meaning of the events as they unfold.

SUE LAWLEY: Michael Sandel, thank you very much indeed. Thank you for four
lectures that have explored with great clarity and depth the moral issues implicit in
many aspects of our everyday lives. They’ve provoked great interest and debate is
surrounding them. It will undoubtedly go on. But for now, we finish. My thanks to
our hosts here at George Washington University and to all of you who’ve either
attended or listened to our programmes. From Washington and the BBC Reith
Lectures 2009, goodbye.

(APPLAUSE)
18

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you.

19

