THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT IS
TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME AS IT WAS BROADCAST. THE
NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE BBC
NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN GUARANTEE THE
ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.

REITH LECTURES 2009: A NEW CITIZENSHIP
Presenter: Professor Michael Sandel
Lecture 3: Genetics and Morals
TRANSMISSION: 23rd JUNE 2009
RADIO 4

9.00-9.45am

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to the Centre for Life in Newcastle on Tyne. It’s
a place dedicated to a greater public understanding of science, and it brings together
leading authorities from all over the world to discuss issues arising out of medical
research. So it really is an ideal venue for the third of this year’s BBC Reith Lectures,
the subject of which is Genetics and Morals.

Last week’s lecture outlined the case for a more robust moral and spiritual debate in
our broad political life. Today, we’re looking at the ethics of genetic technology.
Ladies and gentlemen, please will you welcome the BBC’s Reith Lecturer for 2009:
Professor Michael Sandel.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you, thank you.

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, just a relevant bit of background before we start. I know
that you were on George Bush, President Bush’s Bioethics Committee from 2002 for
about four years, weren’t you? Was there vigorous debate on that committee, or were
they a rather conservative lot?

MICHAEL SANDEL: On the whole, it was a conservative group, which is to be
expected since it was appointed by President Bush. I was surprised when I was invited
1

to be a part of it. (LAWLEY LAUGHS) I think they knew I wasn’t among his
foremost supporters, but I think they did want - and they ultimately did get - a range
of views.

SUE LAWLEY: And what about different religious persuasions because we know
that George Bush’s opinions were very much informed, are very much informed by
his Methodist faith. You’re of the Jewish faith. Did your religious opinions come into
it at all? Were they put on the table?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Not directly, but I think it’s fair to say that there were a range
of religious backgrounds as well as professional backgrounds represented. There were
people who came from theology; others who came from science, from law, from
public policy, and from philosophy.

SUE LAWLEY: But in the end, you found yourself in the minority, didn’t you? You
lost the debate as it were?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well I did on the part of the debate that consumed six months
of our work, which was the most politically contested area; and that had to do with the
use of cloning technologies for embryonic stem cell research, and I did find myself
among the dissenters. I was in favour of this kind of research going forward and the
majority voted for at least a moratorium, if not a ban, on that procedure.

SUE LAWLEY: But you’ve pointed out since that George Bush said on several
occasions that he regarded embryonic stem cell research - and I quote - as “the taking
of innocent human life”, and he didn’t want public money spent on it. But he didn’t
stop private money being spent on it, so what does the moral philosopher say about
that position?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I think if the reason for refusing federal funding for
embryonic stem cell research is the thought, as some people conscientiously hold, that
the early embryo is morally equivalent to a person - if one holds that view, then I
think in consistency one should ban the practice, not just refuse to fund it.
2

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, we look forward to hearing what you have to say about the
whole landscape of genetics and morals. The floor is yours.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well thank you, Sue, and thanks to all of you for coming. It’s
a great pleasure to be with you here in Newcastle. My topic in this lecture, as Sue has
said, is the use of genetic engineering. Is it ethical, for example, to create genetically
enhanced bionic athletes? I understand that Newcastle United is looking to buy a few.
(LAUGHTER)

But let me begin with parents and children. A few years ago, a couple decided that
they wanted to have a child, preferably a deaf one. Both parents were deaf, and
proudly so. Like others in the deaf pride community, the couple considered deafness a
cultural identity, not a disability.

The prospective parents were a lesbian couple, so they had in any case to find a sperm
donor. In hopes of conceiving a deaf child, they sought out a sperm donor with five
generations of deafness in his family. And they succeeded. Their son was born deaf.

The couple was surprised when the story brought widespread condemnation. Most of
the outrage focused on the charge that they had deliberately inflicted a disability on
their child. But the parents denied that deafness is a disability. They argued they
simply wanted a child like themselves.

Is it wrong to make a child deaf by design? If so, what makes it wrong - the deafness
or the design? Suppose, for the sake of argument, that deafness is not a disability, but
a distinctive identity. Is there still something wrong with the idea of parents picking
and choosing the kind of child they will have? Or do parents do that all the time, in
their choice of mate and, these days, in their use of new methods of assisted
3

reproduction?

Breakthroughs in genetics present us with a promise and a predicament. The promise
is that we may soon be able to treat and prevent a host of debilitating diseases. The
predicament is that our newfound genetic knowledge may also enable us to
manipulate our own nature - to enhance our muscles, memories, and moods; to choose
the sex, height, and other genetic traits of our children”. Most people find at least
some forms of genetic engineering disquieting. But it’s not easy to explain what’s
wrong with it.

In order to grapple with the ethics of enhancement, we need to confront questions
largely lost from view in the modern world - questions about the proper stance of
human beings toward the given world. Since these questions verge on theology,
modern philosophers and political theorists tend to shrink from them. But our new
powers of biotechnology make these questions unavoidable.

Consider muscles. Everyone would welcome a gene therapy to alleviate muscular
dystrophy. But what if the same therapy were used to produce genetically altered
athletes? Researchers have developed a synthetic gene that, when injected into the
muscle cells of mice, makes muscles grow and prevents them from deteriorating with
age. These genetically altered, bulked-up mice have already attracted the attention of
athletes. Although the therapy is not yet approved for human use, the prospect of
genetically enhanced weightlifters, cyclists, and sprinters is easy to imagine.

So should the International Olympic Committee, should professional sports leagues
ban genetically-altered athletes, and if so, on what grounds? The two most obvious
reasons for banning drugs in sports are safety and fairness: steroids, for example, have
harmful side effects. But suppose, for the sake of argument, that muscle-enhancing
gene therapy turned out to be safe. Would there still be a reason to ban it? There is
something unsettling about the spectre of genetically-altered athletes lifting SUVs or
running a 3-minute mile. But what really is troubling about these scenarios? Is it
simply that we find such super-human spectacles too bizarre to contemplate, or does
our unease point to something of ethical significance?
4

Now you might be thinking that a genetically enhanced athlete would have an unfair
advantage over his un-enhanced competitors. But the fairness objection can easily be
met: if gene-doping were safe, it could be made available to everyone. So, if genetic
enhancement in sports is morally objectionable, it must be for reasons other than
fairness.

Genetic enhancement is possible for brains as well as brawn. Researchers have
produced super-smart mice by inserting extra copies of a memory-related gene into
mouse embryos. The altered mice learn more quickly and remember things longer
than ordinary mice.

Today, biotech companies are in hot pursuit of memory-enhancing drugs, or
“cognition enhancers” - as they call them - for human beings. One obvious market for
such drugs consists of those who suffer from serious memory disorders, such as
Alzheimer’s or dementia. But the companies also have their sights on a bigger market:
us baby boomers over fifty who will soon begin to encounter the natural memory loss
that comes with age. Meanwhile, drugs such as Ritalin and Adarol, prescribed for
Attention Deficit Order, are increasingly used by college students seeking to boost
their performance on exams.

As with muscles, so with cognition, the question is this: Should we devote our
biotechnological ingenuity to curing disease and repairing injury, or should we also
seek to improve our lot by re-engineering our bodies and our minds?

Perhaps the most alluring non-medical use of bioengineering is sex selection. For
centuries, parents have been trying to choose the sex of their children. Aristotle
advised men who wanted a boy to tie off their left testicle before intercourse. Other
recommended methods have involved timing conception in relation to the phases of
the moon. But today, biotech succeeds where folk remedies failed.

One technique of sex selection arose with prenatal tests using amniocentesis and
5

ultrasound. These medical technologies were developed to detect genetic
abnormalities. But they can also reveal the sex of the foetus, allowing for the abortion
of a foetus of the undesired sex.

Another sex selection technique is embryo screening. For couples undergoing in vitro
fertilisation (IVF), it is possible to choose the sex of the child before the fertilised egg
is implanted in the womb.

And the latest technology of sex selection is sperm sorting. It makes it possible to
choose the sex of your child even before it’s conceived. There’s a for-profit fertility
clinic in the United States that offers the procedure. It turns out it’s possible to sort the
X-bearing and Y-bearing sperm according to their weight. And the fertility centre
licensed the technology from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which had
developed a process for breeding cattle.

Now one objection to sex selection is that it is an instrument of sex discrimination,
typically against girls. In China, there are now 120 boys for every 100 girls. In parts
of Northern India, the ratio of boys to girls is 140 to 100. But suppose sex selection
techniques were employed in a society that didn’t favour boys over girls, and that
wound up with a balanced sex ratio. Would it then be unobjectionable? And what if it
became possible to select not only for sex but also for height, eye colour, skin colour?
What about sexual orientation, IQ, musical ability, athletic prowess?

There is something troubling about these scenarios of genetic manipulation. But what
exactly is wrong with using genetic engineering to turn ourselves into bionic athletes,
or our offspring into designer children?

Some people say the problem is that genetic engineering is a shortcut that undermines
effort. An athlete who goes in for gene-doping evades the hard work that goes with
rigorous training. Suppose we learn that the achievements of our favourite football
star were due to genetic alteration? Our admiration for the athlete would surely be
6

diminished.

But the problem with genetic enhancement is not simply that it undermines effort. The
deeper danger is that it represents a kind of hyper agency - a Promethean aspiration to
remake nature, including human nature, to serve our purposes and satisfy our desires.
What this drive to mastery misses is an appreciation of the gifted character of human
powers and achievements.

To acknowledge the giftedness of life is to recognise that our talents and powers are
not wholly our own doing, despite the efforts we expend to develop them. An
appreciation of the gifted aspect of life constrains the Promethean project and
conduces to a certain humility. It is, in part, a religious sensibility. But its resonance
reaches beyond religion.

Consider parenting. To appreciate children as gifts is to accept them as they come, not
as objects of our design or products of our will or instruments of our ambition.
Parental love should not be contingent on the talents and attributes the child happens
to have. We choose our friends and spouses at least partly on the basis of qualities we
find attractive. But we do not choose our children. Their qualities are unpredictable,
and even the most conscientious parents can’t be held wholly responsible for the kind
of child they have. This is why parenthood, more than other human relationships,
teaches what the theologian William F. May calls an “openness to the unbidden”.

This resonant phrase, an “openness to the unbidden”, helps us see that the deepest
moral objection to enhancement lies less in the perfection it seeks than in the human
disposition it expresses and promotes. The problem is not that the parents usurp the
autonomy of the child they design. (After all, it’s not as if the child could otherwise
choose her genetic traits for herself.) The problem lies in the hubris of the designing
parents. Even if this disposition doesn’t make parents tyrants to their children, it
disfigures the relation of parent and child. And it deprives the parent of the humility
and of the enlarged human sympathies that an “openness to the unbidden” can
7

cultivate.

In caring for the health of their children, parents don’t cast themselves as designers or
convert their children into products of their will. The same can’t be said of parents
who pay large sums to select the sex of their child or who aspire to bioengineer their
child’s intellectual endowments or athletic abilities.

Today’s debates about genetic engineering and enhancement are reminiscent of an
older debate about eugenics - the misbegotten attempt to improve the so-called gene
pool of humankind. Critics of genetic engineering argue that the quest for designer
children is nothing more than “privatised” or “free market” eugenics. Defenders of
enhancement reply that genetic choices freely made aren’t really eugenic, at least not
in the pejorative sense that term conveys. Traditional eugenic policies were
repugnant, they argue, only because they were coercive - involving forced sterilisation
laws, for example.

This defence seems to me mistaken. Yes, the Nazis gave eugenics a bad name. But
eugenics is repugnant even when it’s not genocidal and coercive.

Consider a recent eugenics policy that stops short of coercion. In the 1980s, Lee Kuan
Yew, the Prime Minister of Singapore, worried that well-educated Singaporean
women were producing fewer children than less-educated ones. Subsequent
generations, he feared, would become “depleted of the talented”. So to stave off what
he saw as this insipient decline, he instituted policies to encourage college graduates
to marry and have children. Here were some of the policies enacted - a state-run
computer dating service, financial incentives for educated women to bear children,
courtship classes in the undergraduate curriculum (LAUGHTER) And free love boat
cruises for unmarried college graduates. At the same time, low-income women who
lacked a high school degree, they were offered something too: $4,000 as a down
payment on a low-cost apartment - provided they were willing to be sterilised.

Singapore’s policy gave eugenics a free market twist; rather than force disfavoured
citizens to undergo sterilisation, it paid them to do so. But Singapore’s voluntary
8

eugenics policy is objectionable, nonetheless. Even where no outright coercion is
involved, there remains something troubling with the ambition to control the genetic
characteristics of the next generation. These days, this ambition is less likely to be
found in state-sponsored eugenics policies than in procreative practices that enable
parents to pick and choose the kind of children they will have.

In the age of the genome, the language of eugenics is making a comeback, not only
among critics but also among defenders of enhancement. An influential school of
Anglo-American political philosophers calls for a new “liberal eugenics”, as they call
it, by which they mean non-coercive genetic enhancements that don’t restrict the
autonomy of the child. “While old-fashioned authoritarian eugenicists sought to
produce citizens out of a single centrally designed mould”, writes Nicholas Agar,
“the distinguishing mark of the new liberal eugenics is state neutrality.” The idea is
that government may not tell parents what sort of children to design, and parents may
engineer in their children only those traits that improve their capacities without
biasing their choice of life plans.

But removing the coercion does not lay to rest the moral objection. The problem with
eugenics and genetic engineering is that both represent the one-sided triumph of
wilfulness over giftedness, of dominion over acceptance. Now why, you may wonder,
why should we worry about this triumph? Why not shake off our unease with
enhancement as so much superstition? What would be lost if biotechnology dissolved
our sense of giftedness?

From the standpoint of religion, the answer is clear. To believe that our talents and
powers are wholly our own doing is to misunderstand our place in creation. It’s to
confuse our role with God’s. But religion is not the only source of reasons to care
about giftedness. The moral stakes can also be described in secular terms. If the
genetic revolution erodes our appreciation for the gifted character of human powers
and achievements, it will transform three key features of our moral landscape humility, responsibility, and solidarity.

Let me explain. In a social world like ours that prizes mastery and control, parenthood
9

is a school for humility. That we care deeply about our children, and yet can’t choose
the kind we want, teaches parents to be open to the unbidden. Such openness is a
disposition worth affirming, not only within families, but in the wider world as well.
It invites us to abide the unexpected, to live with dissonance, to reign in the impulse to
control.

It’s sometimes thought that genetic enhancement erodes human responsibility by
overriding effort. But the real problem is the explosion, not the erosion of
responsibility. As humility gives way, responsibility expands to daunting proportions.
We attribute less to chance and more to choice. Parents become responsible for
choosing, or failing to choose, the right traits for their children. Athletes become
responsible for acquiring, or failing to acquire, the talents that will help their team
win.

One of the blessings of seeing ourselves as creatures of nature, or God, or fortune is
that we aren’t wholly responsible for the way we are. The more we become masters of
our genetic endowments, the greater burden we bear for the talents we have and the
way we perform. Today, when a basketball player misses a rebound, his coach can
blame him for being out of position. Tomorrow, the coach may blame him for being
too short.

Paradoxically, the explosion of responsibility for our own fate, and that of our
children, may diminish our sense of responsibility with those less fortunate than
ourselves. The more alive we are to the chanced nature of our lot, the more reason we
have to share our fate with others.

Why, after all, do the successful owe anything to the least advantaged members of
society? One compelling answer to this question leans heavily on the notion of
giftedness: the natural talents that enable the successful to flourish are not their own
doing but, rather, their good fortune - a result of the genetic lottery. If our genetic
endowments are gifts, rather than achievements for which we can claim credit, it’s a
10

mistake and a conceit to assume that we are entitled somehow to the entire bounty our
talents reap in a market economy. We therefore have an obligation to share this
bounty with those who, through no fault of their own, may lack comparable gifts.

So here’s the connection between solidarity and giftedness: a lively sense of the
contingency of our gifts - an awareness that none of us is wholly responsible for his or
her success - this saves a meritocratic society from sliding into the smug assumption
that success is the crown of virtue, that the rich are rich because they are more
deserving than the poor.

If genetic engineering enabled us to override the results of the genetic lottery, to
replace chance with choice, the gifted character of human powers and achievements
would recede and, with it, perhaps, our capacity to see ourselves as sharing a common
fate. The successful would become even more likely than they are now to view
themselves as self-made and self-sufficient. The meritocracy, less chastened by
chance, would become harder, less forgiving.

It is tempting to think that bioengineering our children and ourselves for success in a
competitive society is an exercise of freedom. But changing our nature to fit the
world, rather than the other way around, is actually the deepest form of
disempowerment. It distracts us from reflecting critically on the world. It deadens the
impulse to social and political improvement. So I say rather than bioengineer our
children and ourselves to fit the world, let’s instead create social and political
arrangements more hospitable to the gifts and the limitations of the imperfect human
beings that we are. Thank you very much.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael, thank you very much indeed. I’m now going to invite
questions from the audience here at the Centre for Life in Newcastle. We’ve also been
taking some written questions, as the lecture’s been going on, so I hope to be feeding
in some of those too. I’m going to start by inviting Matt Ridley here, the science
writer and journalist. Matt Ridley, your question if you would?
11

MATT RIDLEY: In the past, more harm has come from the top down nationalising
of reproductive decisions (as eugenics did) than from the individualising of them (as
test tube babies did). Yet it seems to me you’re apparently suggesting that decisions
about genetic disease prevention be left to families, while decisions about genetic
enhancement be effectively nationalised. Who will appoint the nationalised committee
that decides, say, whether a mother of two boys may choose to have a girl as her third
baby?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I do think this should be collectively, which is to say
democratically, deliberated and decided. If we turn parenting into a kind of extension
of the consumer society, then the shape and tone in the moral culture will be different.
That’s a big decision to make and it shouldn’t be made by the market alone. It should
be made democratically. How exactly to work it out - whether by an Act of
Parliament or through the creation of commissions - would be a further question. I
don’t want to leave it to the market.

SUE LAWLEY: Matt Ridley, I mean do you believe that we should be able to
choose the sex of our offspring?

MATT RIDLEY: On the whole, yes. I don’t myself see these large social
disadvantages. But my main issue is how we take the decision as to whether
something is an enhancement or a cure.

SUE LAWLEY: Let’s have a show of hands. Who in this room believes we should
be able to choose the sex of our offspring if we want to? I think very, very few people
- 5% in this room. Thank you very much, Matt Ridley. I’m going to move onto Alison
Murdoch, who’s Professor of Reproductive Medicine at Newcastle University. And in
fact it was her team, Michael, which created the UK’s first cloned human embryo in
2005. Professor Murdoch?

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: Many of the potential interventions that you’ve
described are actually already prohibited in UK law …

12

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes.

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: … such as sex selection, for social reasons, and genetic
modification of an embryo. Others that you’ve talked of, I think perhaps slightly more
comfortably fit with science fiction. I mean my great worry is that we actually end up
restricting the availability of new technologies that have proven benefit because of
sort of scientific fantasy that makes an interesting philosophical debate.

SUE LAWLEY: Which were the fantasies, you felt, that Michael mentioned in his
lecture?

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: I think when you’re talking about muscle enhancement
and you’re talking about intelligence or not, intelligence is far more important than
just genes.

SUE LAWLEY: And lifting SUV’s.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Right.

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: Yes. (LAUGHS)

SUE LAWLEY: Michael?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Right, intelligence - I agree - is something that’s very remote
from being real life genetically, though there are other forms of cognition
enhancement that are feasible. Muscle enhancement in mice has already taken place.
But I think what you said at the beginning comes close to the point that I would like to
make, which is the regulatory system that the UK has, which restricts sex selection
and other forms of genetic technologies that do not have a medical purpose, I think we
in the United States would do well to emulate. Because what happens is in the
absence of a regulatory system, it’s easy to generate political opposition to legitimate
science, including stem cell research.
13

SUE LAWLEY: Professor Murdoch?

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: If you look at the issue say of sex selection again,
which you talked about - yes it’s banned for social reasons in the UK, but that actually
doesn’t stop people selecting the child. As you mentioned, it’s quite possible to have
an amniocentesis and a scan, find it’s the wrong sex, and then go and have an
abortion, or to go abroad and have it done where it’s not banned.

SUE LAWLEY: So it’s a kind of free market eugenics?

PROFESSOR MURDOCH: And that potentially is driving down an even worse
route than doing sex selection of an embryo before it’s put back. And it only gives
that option to people who can afford to pay.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well let me give you a very concrete illustration of how some
regulation actually helps science. In the United States, there is no ban on human
reproductive cloning, which is to say cloning to create babies. And the reason there
isn’t is that the opponents of embryonic stem cell research insisted that the two issues
be linked because they know that politically the best chance they have for restricting
the research that I’m in favour of, and that you carry out in stem cell research, is to
connect it with the spectre, the fear of cloning to make babies. So having that ban will
create more political support, not less, for responsible science - including embryonic
stem cell research.

SUE LAWLEY: Let me call Heather Ging. You’ve put in a written question. Would
you like to tell us what it is?

GING: It’s said that we have a growing underclass. Can enhancement of the kind you
describe be used for them on their behalf?

14

MICHAEL SANDEL: It’s a good question. If I really thought that the way societies
like ours work would lead new and expensive biotechnologies to lift up those at the
bottom rather than simply serve the consumer preferences of those at the top, then I
would hesitate a little before arguing against their use. But I think this prospect is
actually the biggest science fiction scenario that we’ve discussed tonight.

SUE LAWLEY: Steve Gater, you’ve put a written question in.

STEVE GATER: It’s my experience that most parents want the very best for their
offspring, so how can we deny them that if genetic engineering could actually provide
that in some way?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I do think there’s a problem, even before we get to high-tech
genetic engineering of children - I think there may be reason to question some of the
low-high, high-stress, high-pressure, hyper-parenting that actually is already taking
place in our society. So my worry about using the genetic engineering is not that it’s
radically different from what we already do, but that it actually will accentuate a
troubling tendency already present in our culture.

SUE LAWLEY: The problem would be, surely, if it were available - that kind of
genetic engineering to make your child better at football or whatever it was - if one set
of parents decided to take advantage of it and another didn’t? And then of course you
know your child would not be nagging you for a new set of trainers. It would be
nagging you to say, “Why can’t I have what his daddy’s given him?”

MICHAEL SANDEL: I don’t think that’s the main objection though. There’s
another problem if you look at the collective effect. If parents went in let’s say for
height enhancement - and human growth hormone is already available to parents and
paediatricians who want their children to be taller - even if they don’t suffer from a
hormonal deficiency, if you imagine people buying their way to taller kids, what you
would get would be a changing standard of what counts as tall. Instead of having to be
6’5 to make the basketball team, you would have to be 6’11 or 7’, and there would be
a kind of hormonal arms race that in the end could be self-defeating.
15

SUE LAWLEY: We have an athlete here actually. Charlie Spedding is over this side.
He’s a former Marathon runner. He won bronze in the LA Olympics in the Marathon
and he was the winner of the London Marathon in 1984. I think he still holds the
record actually, Charlie, don’t you?

SPEDDING: Yes, I’m pleased to say I do still hold the English record.

SUE LAWLEY: Your question?

SPEDDING: Where would you draw the line between the useful and the perhaps
abhorrent use of genetics?

MICHAEL SANDEL: I would basically draw the line at health, at a medical
purpose. And I agree that at the boundary, there can be disagreement, there can be
close calls about what’s for the sake of health and what’s for the sake of satisfying
consumer preferences or competitive desire. But I would say health is the basic
principle. I wanted to hear your thought. What about the use of either drugs or gene
doping for runners? What do you think?

SPEDDING: Well I am completely against it. It took me 16 years of hard work to
reach my Olympic Games and if someone had just turned up having had an injection
and beat me, I wouldn’t be very happy about it. (LAUGHTER) I’m completely
against it. I feel that it completely takes away the point of sport. I think the greatest
thing in sport is when David defeats Goliath. And if everyone’s Goliath, how will that
ever happen?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Right, right.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call Sebastian Sethe.

SEBASTIAN SETHE: We have umbrellas, we have clothing, we have houses,
various means of sheltering from the elements. Why is it a gift to submit to the lottery
16

of the genes, but not a Promethean aspiration to shelter from the elements?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Cars and umbrellas and houses - useful as they are - they are
objects. Children aren’t. So there’s the risk that treating children as objects of our
design and ingenuity will change the relation, the norms that govern the relation
between parents and children. That’s my worry.

SUE LAWLEY: Loss of humility, the hubris?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes.

SUE LAWLEY: That concerns you more than perhaps even what we might do to
ourselves?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes.

SUE LAWLEY: It is that we should not in fact behave badly?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Yes. My worry about the erosion of humility as a social norm
that informs our practice is a worry that springs from a certain idea of character and
what a good character and a good life look like. And what I’m trying to do is to open
up this part of our moral vocabulary without saying you must or you must not enter
this discussion from the standpoint of religion.

SUE LAWLEY: But you are saying that we must leave these things to fate, we must
not interfere with that which is the gift, that which we are. We must really be a slave,
as Sebastian Sethe was saying, to the randomness of our genes, the genetic lottery.

MICHAEL SANDEL: Well I wouldn’t say we should be a slave to the randomness
because that buys into the idea that to be free is to be able to exert a kind of, I would
say, consumer freedom, even with respect to the kind of children we have. I think
that’s a spurious idea of freedom, and I would argue here that the freedom of the
17

consumer is only one small part of what it means to be free.

SUE LAWLEY: Now we have someone here we must hear from. He’s a former
Reith Lecturer. He’s Tom Kirkwood, Director of the Institute of Ageing Health, and
he was our Reith Lecturer in 2001. Tom?

KIRKWOOD: You’ve said that you don’t have much difficulty in accepting the need
for enhancement where it is to overcome diseases. Now actually we live in an
interesting world of enhancement because we’re enhancing life expectancy day by
day. The rate of increase is an astonishing five hours increase per day. So this is a
journey where we are seeing dramatic change coming, and I think what I’d be
interested to hear from you is what you see the end of this process?

MICHAEL SANDEL: To increase the lifespan, meaning the maximum lifespan, is
not something that we should aim at as such - mainly because what we could very
well wind up doing is create more years in increasingly debilitating conditions. That
doesn’t seem to me worth aiming at as a society. Our focus should be, in dealing with
the question you raise, we have to have a public debate about what a good life
consists in and not simply assume that longer is better.

SUE LAWLEY: And I’m going to ask for a question from Linda Conlon, who’s the
Chief Executive of the Centre for Life here where we’re broadcasting from, here in
Newcastle.

CONLON: I wonder if you could look into your genetics crystal ball and
fast-forward about fifty years or so and describe to us what you think society would
look like if parents actually could choose the characteristics of their children because I
feel perhaps it could be argued that we all like different things now and it might just
be as varied in fifty years as it is today?

MICHAEL SANDEL: Here’s a test to see whether that scenario is right. Now you
might think well people who go in for cosmetic surgery - everyone is different,
everyone has different taste, different standards of beauty, so you would expect on
18

that theory that people would go for vastly different looks. But if we actually look at
what people go for in cosmetic surgery, it’s really an instrument of cultural
enforcement, of images of beauty that are promulgated in the consumer society and on
billboards and by movie stars. Everyone wants ‘the look’ of the movie star, the
celebrity of the day. I worry that there would be no more diversity and pluralism in
the choice of genetically enhanced traits fifty years from now than we see today in the
looks that people seek when they go in for cosmetic surgery.

SUE LAWLEY: They’d all be potential television presenters, would they?
(SANDEL LAUGHS) Michael, it’s fascinating stuff. Thank you very much indeed.
And thank you, too, to our hosts here at the Centre for Life in Newcastle.

Next week we’re in Washington where Professor Sandel will be joining together the
threads that he’s woven through these past three lectures and telling us why and how
he believes we should strive towards what he’s called A New Politics of the Common
Good. That’s next week from Washington D.C. I hope you’ll tune in then. Until then,
goodbye from Newcastle.

(APPLAUSE)

MICHAEL SANDEL: Thank you.

19

