THIS TRANSCRIPT IS ISSUED ON THE UNDERSTANDING THAT IT
IS TAKEN FROM A LIVE PROGRAMME AS IT WAS BROADCAST.
THE NATURE OF LIVE BROADCASTING MEANS THAT NEITHER THE
BBC NOR THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAMME CAN
GUARANTEE THE ACCURACY OF THE INFORMATION HERE.
REITH LECTURES 2010: SCIENTIFIC HORIZONS
Presenter: Martin Rees
Lecture 2: Surviving the Century
TRANSMISSION: 8th JUNE 2010 RADIO 4

SUE LAWLEY: Hello and welcome to Wales. We’re at the National Museum
Cardiff for the second in this year’s series of BBC Reith Lectures. We have an
audience of scholars, students, experts and commentators from fields such as
astronomy, physics, earthquake engineering, oceanic studies, and many more.

The series is called ‘Scientific Horizons’ and our lecturer is Martin Rees,
Master of Trinity Cambridge, Astronomer Royal, and President of the Royal
Society. He’s exploring the role of science in today’s world. As a cosmologist,
he has an awareness of the immense scale of the future and the threats to our
existence. He believes science can provide solutions to many of them, but are
we capable of implementing those solutions? ‘We are stewards of the world at
a very special time’, he says. ‘Man has the future in his hands.’ Ladies and
gentlemen, please welcome the BBC Reith Lecturer 2010: Professor Martin
Rees.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Martin, you are in fact almost Welsh, aren’t you?

1

MARTIN REES: Well almost. I’m afraid I can’t really say I’m Welsh. I grew
up in a village near Ludlow, which is just one mile the other side of the
border. So I’m really a Shropshire lad, but I come to Wales whenever there’s a
chance; and one of the bonuses of being the Reith Lecturer is the chance to
come to Cardiff today.

SUE LAWLEY: But hence your full title: Lord Rees of Ludlow. You’re not
very keen on titles, are you? Do you hate being called Lord Rees?

MARTIN REES: Well I think it does sound a bit pompous, doesn’t it, but one
uses it to impress public officials, etcetera. (LAUGHTER) But I don’t feel it’s
the kind of thing to use all the time.

SUE LAWLEY: You quite like Professor. Your parents ran a school, didn’t
they? Were they scientists of any kind, or were they journalists?

MARTIN REES: (over) No, they weren’t. They were both teachers. But my
mother was a primary school teacher and my father had a degree in English.

SUE LAWLEY: And did they spot very early on that young Martin had a
natural bent for physics or astronomy or science in general?

MARTIN REES: They didn’t. I didn’t really have that early bent particularly.
I was interested in numbers and nature. But I have to say that when I went to
secondary school, I really did science because I was bad at languages.
(LAUGHTER)

SUE LAWLEY: So you became an astronomer by chance, did you?

MARTIN REES: By chance. I went to university; I did mathematics and

2

physics. And then when I was 21, I wanted to do a PhD, and then I decided I
would do something in applying what I’d learned to astronomy. And I was
very lucky in that that was a time, in the 1960s, when the subject was opening
up: the first evidence for the Big Bang, first evidence for black holes, etcetera.
And so I was quite lucky because if you go into a subject when things are
happening fast, you don’t have to be cleverer than the old guys because
everyone is starting at the beginning.

SUE LAWLEY: That’s very good rationalisation for a very successful career.
Professor Rees, let me invite you to deliver your second lecture on Scientific
Horizons. This one’s called ‘Surviving the Century’.

(APPLAUSE)

MARTIN REES: As an astronomer, I often get mistaken for an astrologer, but
I cast no horoscopes and I’ve got no crystal ball. And in fact scientific
forecasters have a dismal record. When Alexander Graham Bell invented the
telephone, he enthused that: ‘some day every town in America will have one’.
(LAUGHTER) And the great physicist Lord Rutherford averred in 1937 that:
‘nuclear energy was moonshine’. And Thomas Watson, Founder of IBM, said:
‘I think there is a world market for maybe five computers’. (LAUGHTER)
And one of my predecessors as Astronomer Royal said: space travel was
‘utter bilge’. So I won’t add to this inglorious roll call. I’m going to focus on a
key question: how can our scientific capabilities be deployed to ease the
tensions we’ll confront in the coming decades?

Our lives today are moulded by three innovations that gestated in the 1950s,
but whose pervasive impact wasn’t then foreseen. Indeed forecasters
generally underestimate long-term changes even when they overplay shortterm ones.

3

It was in 1958 that Kilby and Noyce built the first integrated circuit. This was
the precursor of today’s ubiquitous silicon chip - perhaps the most
transformative invention of the last century. It has spawned the worldwide
reach of mobile phones and internet, promoting economic growth while itself
being sparing of energy and resources.

In the same decade Watson and Crick discovered the bedrock structure of
heredity: the double helix. This launched the profound science of molecular
biology whose main impact still lies ahead.

And there’s a third technology: space. It’s just over 50 years since the launch
of Sputnik, and that event led President Kennedy to inaugurate the Apollo
programme to land men on the moon. Kennedy’s prime motive was of course
superpower rivalry. Cynics could deride it as a stunt. But it was an
astonishing technical triumph, and it had an inspirational legacy too: distant
images of Earth, its delicate biosphere of clouds, lands and oceans contrasting
with a sterile moonscape where the astronauts left their footprints have ever
since the 1960s been iconic for environmentalists.

But of course there was always a dark side to space. Rockets were primarily
developed to carry nuclear weapons, and those weapons were themselves the
outcome of the World War II Manhattan Project which inaugurated the
nuclear age.

We lived throughout the Cold War under a threat that could have shattered
the entire fabric of civilisation. The risk of global nuclear annihilation,
involving tens of thousands of bombs, is thankfully now in abeyance. But it
hasn’t gone for good. We can’t rule out by mid-century a global political
realignment leading to a standoff between new superpowers that could be
handled less well, or less luckily, than the Cuba missile crisis was. And the

4

risk that smaller nuclear arsenals proliferate and are used in a regional context
even by terrorists is higher than it ever was.

I’ll suggest in this lecture that we shall confront new threats that may be even
harder to control than nuclear weapons. But the response should certainly not
be ‘to go slow’ on science. On the contrary. What’s needed is greater urgency
in advancing knowledge and a redirection of our priorities in applying it.

In looking several decades ahead, there’s one trend we can predict with
confidence: there’ll be more people on the Earth. Fifty years ago the world
population was below 3 billion. It’s more than doubled since then - to 6.8
billion today - and it’s projected to reach about 9 billion by 2050, and the
growth is mainly in the developing world. But nearly half the world’s people
live in countries where fertility has fallen below replacement level, and this
so-called demographic transition is a consequence of declining infant
mortality, availability of contraceptive advice, women’s education and so
forth. But numbers are still rising fast in India, whose population is projected
to overtake China’s and could exceed 1.5 billion by 2050. And they’re rising
fast also in Africa. It’s worth quoting some more numbers here. A hundred
years ago Ethiopia’s population was 5 million. It’s now about 80 million, and
it’ll almost double again by 2050. And Sudan and Uganda will more than
double by mid-century, and its consequent pressure on the water resources of
the Nile Basin. And there could be a billion more people in Africa in 2050 than
there are today.

Most of those who are alive today are under 25. That’s why a continuing
population rise until mid-century seems almost inevitable. But the trends
beyond 2050 will depend on what people now in their teens and 20s decide
about the number and spacing of their children. But in Africa about 200
million women are denied such a choice. Enhancing the life chances of
Africa’s poorest people by providing clean water, primary education and

5

other basics should be a humanitarian imperative; and it would achieve
throughout the continent the demographic transition that has occurred
elsewhere. Failure would be a failure of governance - the resources required
are modest - and it would be a tragedy of continental proportions, which
would also trigger massive migratory pressures.
To feed Africa’s present and future population, modern farming techniques
must be used to enhance productivity, but without degrading the soil or
ecology. And water shortages, perhaps aggravated by climate change, must
be addressed. To produce a kilogram of vegetables with present methods
takes 2,000 litres of water. A kilogram of beef takes 15,000 litres. Can we
specify an optimum population for the world? I don’t think we can. That’s
because we can’t confidently conceive what people’s lifestyles - diet, travel
patterns and energy needs - will be beyond 2050.

The world couldn’t sustain anywhere near its present population if everyone
lived like present day Americans. On the other hand, more than 10 billion
people could live sustainably, with a high quality of life, if all adopted a
vegetarian diet, travelling little but interacting just via super internet and
virtual reality.

I’ve highlighted though the fast rise in global population because it is deemed
by some a taboo subject, tainted by association with eugenics in the 20s and
30s, with Indian policies under Indira Gandhi, and more recently with
China’s effective but hardline one-child policy.

But two messages, in particular, should surely be proclaimed more widely.
First, enhanced education and empowerment of women within this decade surely a benign priority in itself - would reduce fertility rates in the poorest
nations and could thereby reduce the projected world population beyond
2050 by as much as a billion people. Second, a higher population would
aggravate all pressures on resources - especially if the developed world

6

(where most of the growth would be) narrows its gap with the developing
world in its per capita consumption.

Another firm prediction about the post-2050 world is that, as well as being
more crowded, it’ll be warmer. By how much is a matter of continuing
research. The greater the warming, the greater the risk of trimming, for
instance, gradual melting of Greenland’s ice cap or the release from the
Tundra of methane, which would lead to further warming. And that’s the
motive for attempts to reduce global consumption of fossil fuels.

The declared political goal has been to halve global carbon dioxide emissions
by the year 2050. This corresponds to a ration of 2 tonnes of carbon dioxide
per year, each person on the planet. For comparison, the current US level is 20
tonnes per person per year; European figures about 10; the Chinese level’s
already 1.5; and the Indian is 1.5. In cutting these emissions, the richer
countries must take the lead without stifling economic growth in the
developing world where emissions in the short-term are bound to rise.

Success in halving global carbon emissions would be a momentous
achievement - one where all nations acted together in the interests of a future
beyond the normal political horizon. The meagre progress in Copenhagen last
December didn’t instil optimism. On the other hand - odd though this may
sound - the political response to the financial crisis may offer encouragement.
Who would have thought two years ago that the financial system would have
been so transformed that big banks were nationalised? Likewise we need
coordinated, outside-the-box action to avoid serious risk of a long-term
energy crisis.

The world spends more than 5 trillion dollars a year on energy and its
infrastructure. There’s a glaring contrast here with health and medicine where
worldwide R&D expenditures are much, much higher. The clean energy

7

challenge deserves a priority and commitment akin to the Manhattan Project
or the Apollo moon landing.

It’s sometimes said fatalistically that the UK’s stance on all this is of marginal
import because our carbon emissions are only 1 or 2 percent of the problem.
But we have leverage in two respects. First politically. We’ve earned
international influence because of the UK government’s leadership ever since
the Gleneagles G8 Summit, and because we’ve already enshrined in our
Climate Change Act a commitment to cut our own emissions by 80 percent
over the next 40 years. Second, we have the expertise to spearhead some of
the technologies needed for a low carbon economy. We need to keep our
lights on to ensure energy security for ourselves, but beyond that imperative
it’s in our interest not to fall behind the Chinese in developing clean energy
technologies that the world will need.

In wave and tidal energy, for instance, the UK could lead. We have the
geography - capes round our coast with fast-flowing tidal currents - and we
have marine technology from North Sea oil and gas. And since I’m speaking
in Cardiff, I should highlight the Severn barrage scheme as well.

What about biofuels? There’s been ambivalence because they compete for
land use for food growing and forests, but in the long-run GM techniques
may lead to novel developments: bugs that break down cellulose or marine
algae that convert solar energy directly into fuel.

Another need is for improved energy storage. In the US Steve Chu, the Nobel
Prize-winning physicist whom President Obama appointed as Energy
Secretary, has given priority to improving batteries - for electric cars and to
complement unsteady power sources such as sun and wind and tides.

What’s the role of nuclear power? I’d myself favour the UK having a

8

replacement generation of nuclear power stations - and boosted R&D into
‘fourth generation’ reactors and into nuclear fusion. But one can’t be relaxed
about a worldwide expansion of nuclear power unless internationally
regulated fuel banks are established to provide enriched uranium and remove
and store the waste. Otherwise there’s too much risk of weapon proliferation.

I think an attractive long-term option for Europe is solar energy: huge
collectors - most maybe in North Africa - generating power that’s distributed
via a continent-wide smart grid. Achieving this would require vision,
commitment and public-private investment on the same scale as the building
of Europe’s railways in the 19th century.
Some pessimists argue that the transition to a low carbon economy won’t
happen fast enough, and that the international community should, as a
fallback, contemplate a ‘plan b’ - being fatalistic about the rise in carbon
dioxide, but combating the warming it induces by, for instance, putting
reflecting aerosols in the upper atmosphere or even vast sunshades in space.

The political problems of such geo-engineering may be overwhelming: not all
nations would want to turn down the thermostat equally, and there could be
unintended side effects. An alternative geo-engineering approach would be
direct extraction of carbon from the atmosphere. This approach would be
more acceptable politically. But it seems to me right at least to study geoengineering, to clarify which options make sense and which don’t; to explore
the governance issues they raise and perhaps damp down undue optimism
about a technical quick-fix of our climate.

Energy security, food supplies and climate change are the prime long-term
threats without enemies that confront us - all aggravated by rising
populations. But there are others. For instance, rapid changes in land use may
jeopardise whole eco systems.

9

There have been five great extinctions in the geological past. Human actions
are causing a sixth. The current extinction rate is a hundred, even a thousand
times higher than normal. We’re destroying the book of life before we’ve read
it. And biodiversity - manifested in forests, coral reefs, deep oceans and all
Earth’s other eco systems - is often proclaimed as a crucial component of
human well-being. And it is: we’re clearly harmed if fish stocks dwindle to
extinction; there are plants whose gene pool might be useful to us; and
massive destruction of the rainforests could accelerate global warming.

But there’s an ethical issue here. For some environmentalists, these
instrumental - and anthropocentric - arguments aren’t the only compelling
ones. For them, preserving the riches of our biosphere has value in its own
right, over and above what it means to us humans.
So far today I’ve talked about threats we’re collectively imposing on the
environment, but I’d like now briefly to highlight a new type of vulnerability,
stemming from fast developing technologies.

Almost all innovations entail new risks: in the early days of steam, people
died when poorly designed boilers exploded. But something has changed.
Most of the old risks that humans caused were localised - if a boiler explodes,
it’s horrible but there’s a limit to just how horrible. But there are new hazards
whose consequences could be so widespread that even a tiny probability is
disquieting. We’re all precariously dependent on elaborate networks:
electricity grids, air traffic control, international finance, just-in-time delivery
and so forth. It’s crucial to ensure maximum resilience of all such systems.
And there could be other vulnerabilities. It’s becoming feasible, for instance,
to stitch together long strands of DNA and thereby construct from scratch the
blueprint of an organism. This offers huge potential for medicine and
agriculture. But there are risks. Already the genome for some viruses - polio,
Spanish flu and SARS - have been synthesised. Expertise in such techniques
will become widespread, posing a manifest risk of bio-error or bio-terror.

10

And we’re kidding ourselves if we think that those with technical expertise
will all be balanced and rational. Expertise can be allied with fanaticism - not
just the traditional fundamentalism that we’re so mindful of today, but that
exemplified by some New Age cults: extreme eco freaks; violent animal rights
campaigners, and the like.

And there will be individual weirdoes with the mindset of those who now
unleash computer viruses - the mindset of an arsonist. The global village will
have its village idiot.

In a future era of vast individual empowerment where even one malign act
could be too many, how could we be safeguarded? Maybe our society will
shift towards having more intrusion and less privacy. Indeed the rash
abandon with which people put their intimate details on Facebook and our
acquiescence in ubiquitous CCTV suggest that such a shift would meet
surprisingly little resistance. Or will there be pressures to constrain diversity
and individualism?

This lecture has focused on some potential downsides of the 21st century. But
despite all that, I am actually an optimist - at least a techno-optimist. There
seems no scientific impediment to achieving a sustainable world beyond 2050
where the developing countries have narrowed the gap with the developed,
and all benefit from further scientific advances that could have as great and
benign an impact as information technology and medical advances have had
in the last decade.

It’s the politics and the sociology that pose the deepest concerns. Will richer
countries realise that it’s in their self-interest for the developing world to
prosper, sharing fully in the benefits of globalisation? Can nations sustain
effective but non-repressive governance in the face of threats from small

11

groups with high-tech expertise? And, above all, can our institutions prioritise
projects which are long-term in political perspective even if a mere instant in
the history of our planet?

And I’ll conclude with a cosmic vignette. Suppose some aliens had been
watching our planet from afar for its entire history. What would they have
seen? Over nearly all that immense time, 45 million centuries, Earth’s
appearance would have altered very gradually. Continents drifted; the ice
cover waxed and waned; successive species emerged, evolved and became
extinct.

But in just a tiny sliver of the Earth’s history, the last one millionth part,
patterns of vegetation altered at an accelerating rate. This signalled the
growing impact of humans and the advent of agriculture.

Then, in just one century, came other changes. The amount of carbon dioxide
in the air began to rise anomalously fast. The planet became an intense
submitter of radio waves - the output from TV, cellphones and radar
transmissions. And something else unprecedented happened: small
projectiles, launched from the planet’s surface, escaped the biosphere
completely. Some were propelled into orbits around the Earth; some
journeyed to the moon and planets.

If they understood astrophysics, the aliens could predict that the biosphere
would face doom in a few billion years when our sun flares up and dies. But
could they have predicted this sudden fever less than halfway through the
Earth’s life? And if they continued to keep watch, what might these
hypothetical aliens witness in the next hundred years in this unique century?
Will a final spasm be followed by silence? Or will the planet itself stabilise?

12

And will some of the objects launched from the Earth spawn new oases of life
elsewhere?

Well the answer depends on how the challenges I’ve addressed today can be
met. 21st century science, optimally applied, could offer immense benefits to
the developing and the developed world, but it will present new threats. To
confront these successfully, and to avoid foreclosing humanity’s long-term
potential, should be our aspiration for the coming decades. Thank you very
much.

(APPLAUSE)

SUE LAWLEY: Thank you very much indeed. And now to questions from the
floor here in the National Museum Cardiff where we have an audience of
academics and experts and students and laypeople. I’ve seen lots of questions
being handed in during the course of the lecture, so I know there are plenty.
I’m going to call for a question first from Peter Harper who’s Head of
Research at the Centre for Alternative Technology here in Wales. And I think
you focus on the changes people can make to their everyday lives, such as
organic farming or environmentally friendly ways of running their homes yes?

PETER HARPER: Indeed, but that’s not what I would like to ask Professor
Rees. You’ve mentioned several times the need for re-prioritising our work,
but that means doing some things less perhaps. Do you think that some of the
more fun stuff, we should do less of? I’m thinking of things like the moons of
Saturn, the origins of humanity, even the mighty Higgs boson. Perhaps it’s
time to stop doing that stuff or defer it until the 22nd century. Isn’t it time for
all hands on deck?

SUE LAWLEY: You might just have to tell us what the mighty Higgs boson is

13

before we go any further.

MARTIN REES: It would take too long to explain that.

SUE LAWLEY: But it’s actually what the Large Hadron Collider is up to.

MARTIN REES: It’s what … The big machine in Geneva is looking for it yes, yes

SUE LAWLEY: Exactly.

MARTIN REES: Well I think I would disagree because the amount spent in
actual pure research is only a tenth of what’s spent in the development stage.
And I think if we look back in the past, we have found that the research that’s
paid off has been the unpredictable part, and I think it’s in the development
and the applications that we need to make the choices. And obviously I think
we need to spend more on the developed countries; and in terms of energy
research, I think we could afford to multiply the amount spent on energy
R&D by a factor of 5 or 10 very easily.

SUE LAWLEY: Do you accept that, Peter Harper?
PETER HARPER: Yes. (laughs) look, the Large Hadron Collider has cost quite
a lot of money and there’s thousands and thousands of scientists there. I’d
love to see them working on energy research. Why aren’t they?

SUE LAWLEY: That’s the point, isn’t it?

MARTIN REES: Yes.

SUE LAWLEY: I mean do we actually need what the Large Hadron Collider
is doing, or could that money be put to your solar panels in the Sahara Desert

14

and actually get some electricity created?

MARTIN REES: Yes. Well I think there are lots of people who could help
with the solar energy, but I think there are other ways I would get them rather
than from the Hadron Collider. I think there are many other types of activity
which are lower priority than fundamental research.

SUE LAWLEY: You mentioned medical research and I’m going to bring in
Nick Thomas, Dr Nick Thomas. He’s principal scientist at one of the world’s
biggest medical technology companies, and he doesn’t get as much research
funding as he thinks he ought to. I suspect you’re not alone. (LAUGHTER)

DR NICK THOMAS: That’s possible.

MARTIN REES: Yes.

DR NICK THOMAS: The question I’d like to ask. You touched on the
disproportionality between funding of energy and healthcare. Currently I’ve
read that the funding rate levels in energy are about 1 to 10 percent of those in
healthcare. So, first of all, do you believe there’s a fundamental need to
readdress the way science is funded? And if so, do we have to accept a
compromise in individual survival if we reduce healthcare spending to the
greater good for global survival?

MARTIN REES: Again I don’t think we need to have that trade off. I mean I
think the deficiency in the energy R&D is to be blamed on the large utility
companies. Tom Friedman in his book says that the American energy
companies spend less on R&D than the American pet food industry does, and
that seems an imbalance. So I think what is wrong is that the big companies
ought to be investing from the huge turnover they have. Pharmaceutical
companies - as you know better than me - invest about 20 percent, don’t they,

15

in R&D; in the energy utilities, it’s less than 1 percent. And I think of course
investment in a new energy system is very long-term, and probably it needs
some sort of financial incentives which don’t exist at the moment.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call someone who’s handed in a question here.
Jackie Mulville?

JACKIE MULVILLE: Yes, my question is: is the survival of the maximum
number of humans worth the environmental cost?

MARTIN REES: Well as a human being myself, I think that the future of
humans is specially important. But it should not be at the cost of all the rest of
the biosphere, and that’s why I think we do have to ensure that we don’t
ravage the biosphere in the way that is happening now and would happen
even more if population rises and we don’t change our methods. We can
envisage a situation where with modern technology the world population,
even the projected world population, could survive without despoiling the
ecology.

SUE LAWLEY: Okay, I’m going to call in Dr Simon Jones who’s a principal
lecturer in geography at the University of Glamorgan, and he’s an expert in
the management of coastal zones, which you mentioned.

DR SIMON JONES: Thank you, Sue. Martin, you made great play on the
need for energy security during your lecture - alluding, amongst other things,
to the proposed Severn barrage. Would you agree that such proposals are
cumulatively perhaps examples of destruction of the biosphere that inevitably
will lead to human extinction? Are our chances with these things 50/50?

MARTIN REES: Well I think if we are to get our energy by non-fossil fuels,

16

then there’s a limited number of options, isn’t there? There’s tidal, there’s
wind, or there’s nuclear, and all of them have some environmental negative
effects and I think we just have to make the choice of which of those three we
prefer and also of how much energy we want to use per capita in order to
provide the sort of lifestyle that we want. Any option is going to have some
environmental effects and it would not be for me to decide whether you
should go for the Severn barrage or for more wind farms.

SUE LAWLEY: You don’t have a view on the Severn barrage? You sounded
as if you …

MARTIN REES: My instinct is to be in favour of it because it’s true it would
have an environmental impact, but in the long-run it’s not obvious to me that
the environmental consequences would be negative; and compared to the
huge area of wind farms you would need to provide the same amount of
energy, I would have thought that the Severn barrage was something to be
considered very seriously.

SUE LAWLEY: We should explain that it would be a 10 mile wide barrage, I
think, running from somewhere just south of where we are sitting now, from
the south of Cardiff, across to Western-super-Mare. And then, because there’s
this huge tidal rise, a tremendous amount of electricity could be created if it
were held back and let through, yes? Right, what do you think of it?

DR SIMON JONES: I think I’d probably defer to the wisdom of my
grandmother in the first place: that you never appreciate something fully until
it’s gone.

SUE LAWLEY: I see on the front row here we have Rhodri Morgan, the
former first Minister for Wales, what about a comment on the Severn Barrage?

17

RHODRI MORGAN: Yes, well I did want to pick Sir Martin up, I think he
referred to the incoming Energy Secretary in the USA, Stephen Chu deciding
to concentrate a lot of US research effort on batteries so that, in effect, you’ll
be able to store electricity because that would be enormously helpful to
counteract the intermittency of renewable sources that you’ve described as
‘unsteady’ but actually, tidal – it may be intermittent, but it’s not unsteady,
you can predict it for thousands of years in advance. So , you know coalitions
are all the rage at the moment, (laughter) but do you think the most
significant coalition, in the long term, would not be the one launched in the
Rose Garden of 10 Downing Street, just recently, but the coalition of
Professor Chu’s giant banks of energy –storing batteries and the Severn
Barrage belonging to Wales and the West of England?

MARTIN REES: well, I’d agree with that. The other point I’d make is that if
you do things on a full European scale, then, of course, the fluctuations in
wind and sun are smoothed over so the larger the scale over which your grid
can transmit power, then the easier it is to get by with renewables.

SUE LAWLEY: You mentioned weirdoes and village idiots in the global
village. Let me go to Professor Rod Dubrow-Marshall. (LAUGHTER) Oh that
was unfortunate, wasn’t it? Rod Dubrow-Marshall is a social psychologist and
his work focuses on how we can prevent such people unleashing their bioterror on the planet. Your question, if you will? Sorry about that.

PROFESSOR ROD DUBROW-MARSHALL: Yes, hopefully not a weird
question. Do you think our ultimate survival actually depends on the pooling
of knowledge across science, the social sciences and humanities?

SUE LAWLEY: Are you suggesting knowledge isn’t pooled at the moment?

PROFESSOR ROD DUBROW-MARSHALL: Well in universities of course

18

we have the traditional barriers between the sciences and the social sciences
and the humanities and the arts, and of course across those barriers resources
flow perhaps in different rates. But my question is: for us to survive, does it
not have to break down completely in order for knowledge to be pooled to
the maximum?

MARTIN REES: I think yes because technical scientific knowledge by itself is
clearly not sufficient. We have to know what people want, what their
preferences are. Clearly that involves social studies, and we want a humane
public that is steeped in the humanities as well - if possible. So I think we do
want a broadly educated public.

SUE LAWLEY: The professor raised the point about bio-terror, but I believe
you’ve suggested in the past, Martin, that the cause of our demise is more
likely to be error than terror?

MARTIN REES: I think there is a risk of error, unintended consequences of
some of these things, but I think …

SUE LAWLEY: So it’s the idiot scientists, not the village idiot?

MARTIN REES: Well not idiot scientists, but there are of course risks of some
process going wrong - whether it’s an oil spill in the Atlantic or anything like
that. And of course as science gets more powerful, then the downside of
errors gets greater.

SUE LAWLEY: But you’ve also said that in your view we only have a 50/50
chance of surviving the century.

MARTIN REES: Well I didn’t quite say that. I said that I think …

19

SUE LAWLEY: Well you wrote a book called ‘Our Final Century’.

MARTIN REES: Well yes, and what it said was … (LAUGHTER) Yes and
what it said was that I thought there was a 50 percent chance of a setback to
civilisation as bad as a nuclear war, or some consequence of 21st century
technology equally serious. I think the chance of us being wiped out is very
small.

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call Jenny Hainsworth-Lamb.

JENNY HAINSWORTH-LAMB: Hi there. I feel that we’re fed politically
motivated, one-sided scientific opinions. Making informed decisions about
the environment is difficult. To empower ordinary people to change, do you
agree that it’s the responsibility of the scientific community to ensure that
facts and balanced arguments are delivered in plain English?

MARTIN REES: Certainly it should be possible, in my opinion, to make the
essence of science accessible to people in plain English. The technical details
involve mathematics and formulae, etcetera, but the essence I think can be
explained in plain English to the extent that is needed by a citizen to make an
informed decision.

SUE LAWLEY: You grow your own vegetables, don’t you?

JENNY HAINSWORTH-LAMB: I grow my own vegetables and I also,
because I do an awful lot of driving in my professional career - I decided to
keep bees to try and balance out the effect I was having on the environment.
So I hope I’m making a contribution one way or another.

SUE LAWLEY: But essentially what you seem to be suggesting, Martin, was
that you know if we all became vegetarian and went on virtual holidays,

20

everything would be fine.

MARTIN REES: Well that was a caricature. I wasn’t suggesting that. I was
just …

SUE LAWLEY: Oh I quite like the idea.

MARTIN REES: Well I was just saying that there are two extremes. One
extreme is present day Americans; and the other extreme would be not
travelling at all and living in virtual reality and just eating rice. I’m not
advocating either of those extremes

SUE LAWLEY: I’m going to call Nick Pidgeon, Professor of Environmental
Psychology at Cardiff University. You’re currently investigating public
attitudes towards climate change and energy resources.

NICK PIDGEON: Yes, thank you Martin. Your analysis points to the
inescapable fact, in my view, that combating climate change will require a
revolution in technology, in politics, and in our lifestyles on a scale not seen
since the Second World War. Are the public and politicians ready for the scale
of change that will be required here? And, additionally, are there dangers for
scientists when they act as advocates for such change?

MARTIN REES: Well I think if scientists advocate a sort of bare bones
approach that’s going to involve drastic life changes, they won’t get much
resonance. But my view on this whole topic is that the way the problem will
be solved will be by obviously first tackling ways in which we can actually
save money - by using energy more efficiently, insulating buildings better,
etcetera. Then we want to incentivise the development of new clean
technologies and hope to end up when it is in fact no more expensive than
fossil fuels. And so that will enable the transition to happen without there

21

being any hardship involved.

SUE LAWLEY: But the thrust of the question, as I understood it, is can you
take the politicians with you? Are they listening enough?

MARTIN REES: Yes. Well I think the politicians would obviously resonate
with what I’ve just said because they realise it’s hard to get the public to make
a change which imposes inconvenience or hardship on them. But I genuinely
believe that in the long-run we can meet these targets of reducing our
dependence on fossil fuels by moving to other sources of energy which we
can develop in the next 10 or 20 years. But what is very important is to
prioritise the development of those new energy sources - be they wind, tides
or solar or nuclear.

SUE LAWLEY: And you mentioned that President Obama is now listening to
environmentalists in a way in which his predecessor wasn’t. What about our
new Prime Minister? Do you feel you’re going to be pushing at an open door
there?
MARTIN REES: I don’t want to make political statements, but I think the
auguries are positive so far and I think we should pay tribute to the last
government for what it achieved in this area.

SUE LAWLEY: Our thanks to you all. We have to end it there. Thank you
very much indeed. Next week we’ll be broadcasting from Martin’s
professional home - the Royal Society in London, where he’s been President
for the past 5 years: a place where since its foundation, in 1660, great minds
have gathered to discuss the important scientific issues of the day. The title of
his third lecture is tantalising. It’s called ‘What We’ll Never Know: Journey
into the Known Unknown with us - or is it the Unknown Unknown - at the
same time next week. For now, from Cardiff, our thanks to Martin Rees and
goodbye.

22

(APPLAUSE)

23

